CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	As a member of the Committee of Public Accounts, I am very familiar, as is the clerk and the other members of the Oireachtas staff, with Standing Order 218 and the implications that an Oireachtas committee, albeit a different one from this one, had for the nature and course of engagement of Oireachtas committees with witnesses. I am struck by two other aspects. One is the correspondence that we have received, which we went through in private session. It has a lot of content and background information which I was certainly not au fait with or aware of at our December meeting. A lot more information has also come to light. The opening statement of Westmeath County Council states that "an Oireachtas committee is not an appropriate forum to ventilate legal arguments". I accept what the Chairman has said and obviously we may want to discuss the history of this issue. However, if we are not sure that there is, potentially, a challenge to any previous legal case or if a new legal case could emerge, this could have an unintended consequence and implications for either of the State organisations represented, be it the county council or Waterways Ireland, the Oireachtas and, potentially, us. I confirm that I am on campus but the fact we are even having this conversation shows that members are uncertain and unsure. I ask the Chairman to deliberate on whether we should proceed and indicate whether he feels comfortable that we proceed. I would also like to hear from the clerk because Standing Order 218 has changed all engagement with the Committee of Public Accounts, for obvious reasons. We have given notice to the witnesses and I appreciate that they have come in and given their time. From the correspondence that we went through yesterday in private session and from what I have heard today in the opening remarks made by both organisations, there seems to be a very grey area and a narrow point in which we can continue a discussion. I ask the Chair to rule on whether we should proceed and indicate whether he is comfortable that we proceed.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	On a point of information, based on our discussion before Deputy Buckley came in with a more general question, the agenda for today is quite specific and relates to a particular site. We are all aware of which one it is. Plenty of county councils border the River Shannon and, presumably, have unauthorised development along it, but this is very specific. Before we proceed, I, along with colleagues who have spoken about this, would like to hear whether this meeting should proceed, in the Chairman's view, and I would like to hear also from the clerk to the committee.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	I am not familiar with the Owenacurra Centre or St. Brigid's hospital. Given they are health services, is there a reason the petitions are not matters for the health committee? Even if we bring in the groups, followed by the HSE, I cannot see any resolution. The HSE is probably the best option if we are to proceed, but I believe the best route for a petition of this nature is the health committee, not this committee.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	On that, if we are doing a joint meeting, I suggest that we have it with the HSE. Having had a quick look at a few items with regard to St. Brigidâ€™s, I think the group is quite political. If we have questions about the centres, we should ask the HSE ultimately. We thank the petitioners for their petition and for raising the issues and bringing it to the attention of the committee, but we should bring in the HSE and discuss it with it directly. That would be my proposal.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	Yes. I would argue both, but St. Brigid's certainly is.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	I am not doubting there is no interest in this and, absolutely, there is interest in it. As I said, if we want to resolve the issue, we should bring in the HSE. That is my proposal. If it is a joint sitting of this committee and the Committee on Health, that is fine. I think that would be the best proposal.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	I thank the Member from the Upper House. Does the Chairman know whether St. Brigid's and Owenacurra have written to the health committee? Deputy Higgins has made a good point there. As I said, I believe the health committee should be the first one to examine this and then, as Deputy Buckley said, if it is not examined, it can come to us. I still stand by what I said earlier, that if the HSE were to come in we have already received a petition to put before it. Obviously Deputy Buckley is familiar with his local area and the local issues there and I accept what he is saying. It is not a political issue. Other members are more aware of the issues with St. Brigid's. If the HSE were to come in, we could put the questions from the petitioners to it, short-circuit the whole thing and hopefully get a resolution. That would be a good day's work. Does the Chairman or the clerk to the committee know if the petitioners have written to the Joint Committee on Health? As I understand it, Deputy Buckley is a member of that committee or a substitute member. If the petitioners have done so, we should see what that committee does first and then offer to look at it jointly or come back to the issue at our next meeting.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	Deputy Higgins had made a sensible suggestion. I know we have had a long discussion on this and I am conscious that there is a third petition to examine. We should defer the matter until we know what the Joint Committee on Health is doing. Let us come back to it at our next meeting.
CormacDevlin	Deputy Cormac Devlin	2020-02-08	None	Let it not be said that I never agree with Senator Craughwell because I totally agree with his suggestion. In fairness to Senator Murphy, this committee certainly wants to hear about the concerns of constituents and their local centres. There is no question about that. To the point that Deputy Higgins made earlier, we also must be cognisant of our work and duplication with other committees. The Chairman suggested that the clerk would seek information from other committees and I would not limit that to the health committee. From listening to colleagues, nobody seems to be certain which committee is involved. This group is obviously very active and I commend its members on their work to date. If they have corresponded with other committees and subcommittees of the Oireachtas, we need to find out. Perhaps they have been in touch with the Sub-Committee on Mental Health or another Oireachtas committee. We need to be sure whether a site visit is happening. Deputy Buckley says the visit relates to the physical building, and that is fair enough. It might not be about the services. I cannot imagine an Oireachtas committee attending a site and not discussing the services in tandem with discussions of a building. Why would a building be repaired if there are not to be services? They will have a discussion around everything. We need to have that report, as Deputy Higgins rightly said. I would also like for this committee to inquire of all other Oireachtas committees to see is this on the agenda for any other committee. When we establish that, Senator Murphy's point about the regional health forum is a very good suggestion. It is more targeted. The regional health manager would be at those meetings, along with the other professionals within the HSE. We might not actually get that audience at a meeting of ours but that is not to say we should not try. We must ensure there is no duplication happening in the Oireachtas. We have learned today that a site visit is happening, which I welcome. Following on from that, we can discuss it at the next meeting. That is why I agree with Senator Craughwell's suggestion.
