<akomaNtoso xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd ">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#source">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2011-07-06" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/31/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2011-07-06" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/role/debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="mul"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_investigations_oversight_and_petitions/2011-07-06/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-06-25" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/role/debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <analysis source="#source">
        <otherAnalysis xmlns:oir="https://data.oireachtas.ie/ns/1.0" source="#source">
          <oir:volumeReference eId="#vol_None" href="ie/oireachtas/debateRecord/vol/None" showAs="Vol. None"/>
          <oir:numberReference eId="#no_None" href="ie/oireachtas/debateRecord/vol/None/no/None" showAs="No. None"/>
        </otherAnalysis>
      </analysis>
      <references source="#source">
        <TLCOrganization eId="source" href="" showAs="Houses of the Oireachtas"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="generation" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Generation" showAs="Generation"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="reported" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Reported" showAs="Reported"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="publication" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Publication" showAs="Publication"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="AengusOSnodaighSF" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Aengus-Ó-Snodaigh.D.2002-06-06" showAs="Aengus Ó Snodaigh"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="AlanFarrell" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Alan-Farrell.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Alan Farrell"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="CharlieMcConalogue" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Charlie-McConalogue.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Charlie McConalogue"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="DaraCalleary" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Dara-Calleary.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Dara Calleary"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="DarraghOBrien" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Darragh-O'Brien.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Darragh O'Brien"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="DerekNolan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Derek-Nolan.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Derek Nolan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JimmyHarte" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jimmy-Harte.S.2011-05-25" showAs="Jimmy Harte"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JohnPaulPhelan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/John-Paul-Phelan.S.2002-09-12" showAs="John Paul Phelan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="KathrynReilly" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Kathryn-Reilly.S.2011-05-25" showAs="Kathryn Reilly"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelConaghan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-Conaghan.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Michael Conaghan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelHealyRae" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-Healy-Rae.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Michael Healy-Rae"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelMcCarthy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-McCarthy.S.2002-09-12" showAs="Michael McCarthy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichelleMulherin" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michelle-Mulherin.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Michelle Mulherin"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MickWallace" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Mick-Wallace.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Mick Wallace"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PeadarToibin" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Peadar-Tóibín.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Peadar Tóibín"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SusanOKeeffe" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Susan-O'Keeffe.S.2011-05-25" showAs="Susan O'Keeffe"/>
        <TLCRole eId="Chair" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/position/chair" showAs="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole eId="Chairman" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/position/chairman" showAs="Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole eId="author" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/role/author" showAs="author"/>
        <TLCRole eId="editor" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/role/editor" showAs="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>COMHCHOISTE UM IMSCRÚDUITHE, FORMHAOIRSIÚ AGUS ACHAINÍOCHA</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>JOINT COMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS, OVERSIGHT AND PETITIONS</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2011-07-06">Dé Céadaoin, 6 Iúil 2011</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2011-07-06">Wednesday, 6 July 2011</docDate>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <heading>Prelude</heading>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">The Joint Committee met at 2 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">MEMBERS  PRESENT:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_1">
                  <person refersTo="#DaraCalleary">Deputy Dara Calleary,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_2">
                  <person refersTo="#JimmyHarte">Senator Jimmy Harte,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelConaghan">Deputy Michael Conaghan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#DarraghOBrien">Senator Darragh O’Brien,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#AlanFarrell">Deputy Alan Farrell,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#SusanOKeeffe">Senator Susan O’Keeffe,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelHealyRae">Deputy Michael Healy-Rae,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#KathrynReilly">Senator Kathryn Reilly.*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_9">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelMcCarthy">Deputy Michael McCarthy,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_10">
                  <person refersTo="#CharlieMcConalogue">Deputy Charlie McConalogue,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_11">
                  <person refersTo="#MichelleMulherin">Deputy Michelle Mulherin,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_12">
                  <person refersTo="#DerekNolan">Deputy Derek Nolan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_13">
                  <person refersTo="#AengusOSnodaighSF">Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_14">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnPaulPhelan">Deputy John Paul Phelan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_15">
                  <person refersTo="#PeadarToibin">Deputy Peadar Tóibín,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_16">
                  <person refersTo="#MickWallace">Deputy Mick Wallace,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_3">* In the absence of Senator Trevor Ó Clochartaigh.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#">CLERK TO THE COMMITTEE IN THE CHAIR.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Election of Chairman</heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_1">
          <from>Clerk to the Committee</from>
          <p eId="para_17">I call the meeting to order.</p>
          <p eId="para_18">The first item on the agenda today is the election of Chairman.  I now seek nominations for the position of Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh</from>
          <p eId="para_19">I nominate Deputy Peadar Tóibín.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Clerk to the Committee</from>
          <p eId="para_20">Are there any other nominations?  As there are no other nominations, I invite Deputy Tóibín to take the Chair for the remainder of the proceedings.</p>
          <p eId="para_21">Deputy Peadar Tóibín took the Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_22">Go raibh míle maith agaibh.  Táim an-bhuíoch díobh as a bheith tofa anseo inniu.  Is onóir mhór dom é mar is coiste an-thábhachtach é seo.  Tá an-deis againn obair a dhéanamh chun an t-Oireachtas a dhéanamh níos freagraí agus ba mhaith liom go mbeidh an-chuid obair le déanamh againn.  Tá dúthlán ann ach má oibrímid le chéile, beidh seans againn an obair sin a shárú.</p>
          <p eId="para_23">I thank everybody for giving me this position of Cathaoirleach of this committee.  It is a major honour for me to be here in what is a new committee of the Oireachtas, which will develop into an important part of the procedures and activities of Oireachtas Members.</p>
          <p eId="para_24">The opportunity we have is incredible in that we have been given several areas for which to develop a remit and of which we are still the author.  We will get an opportunity to develop the size, scope and power of each of those areas.</p>
          <p eId="para_25">It is also a major opportunity to make the Oireachtas more accountable to the people.  It is an opportunity for us to allow people who, I suppose, up until now have been on the periphery of the Oireachtas to gain access to the very heart of the Oireachtas administration.</p>
          <p eId="para_26">No doubt we should try to develop a practical, hands-on vehicle that makes a real and serious difference to people's lives over the next while.  I have every confidence, from the quality of the TDs and Seanadóirí who are here today, that if we work together in a bipartisan fashion over the coming years, we will be able to achieve that.  Go raibh míle maith agaibh go léir mar gheall ar sin.</p>
        </speech>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Election of Vice Chairman</heading>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_27">An dara rud atá ar an chlár inniu ná toghchán an Leas-Chathaoirligh.  I invite nominations for the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach of this committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JimmyHarte" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Senator Jimmy Harte</from>
          <p eId="para_28">I nominate Deputy Michael McCarthy.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelConaghan" eId="spk_7">
          <from>Deputy Michael Conaghan</from>
          <p eId="para_29">I second that nomination.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_30">Are there any other nominations?  As there are no other nominations, I deem Deputy Michael McCarthy to be elected as Leas-Chathaoirleach of the committee.  Bá mhaith liom comhgairdeas a ghabháil leis an Teachta McCarthy mar tá sé tofa anois mar Leas-Chathaoirleach.  I wish him every success in the future working with the committee.  No doubt with his skills as well, we will be able to guide the committee through its work.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelMcCarthy" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Deputy Michael McCarthy</from>
          <p eId="para_31">Thank you, Chairman.  I thank the members of the committee for the unanimous support for my election to the position of Vice Chairman.  This is an important committee and if we get the necessary resources and the Government holds the referendum in October to give us the powers we need, it will also be a reforming committee and will do justice to the Oireachtas and how it does its business.  A committee on investigations, petitions and oversight is important.  During the last Seanad we changed Standing Orders to include provision for petitions but we did not get beyond that.  I look forward to working with the Chairman and members of the committee to ensure it is successful and productive.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AlanFarrell" eId="spk_10">
          <from>Deputy Alan Farrell</from>
          <p eId="para_32">I congratulate Deputies Tóibín and McCarthy on their election as Chairman and Vice Chairman.  As Deputy McCarthy said, this could become a very important committee within the Houses of the Oireachtas subject to a decision of the electorate in the referendum later this year.  I look forward to working with long-standing and new Members of the Oireachtas in what I hope will be an important committee.  The work of the committee will be done on a cross-party basis and I look forward to our continuing with our work.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelHealyRae" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Deputy Michael Healy-Rae</from>
          <p eId="para_33">I wish the Chairman and the Vice Chairman every success in the years ahead.  They bring a wealth of experience to their roles and I look forward to working with them and all other members of the committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DaraCalleary" eId="spk_12">
          <from>Deputy Dara Calleary</from>
          <p eId="para_34">Ar son ghrúpa Fhianna Fáil, gabhaim comhghairdeas don Chathaoirleach agus don Teachta McCarthy as ucht bheith tofa.  I congratulate the Chairman and Deputy McCarthy.  This committee is a blank sheet and it is up to us to put our stamp on it for future committees to follow.  We will probably discuss the various terms later in the committee but I assure the Chairman, the Vice Chairman and the staff of the committee of our full support.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh</from>
          <p eId="para_35">Gabhaim comhghairdeas leis na Teachtaí Tóibín agus McCarthy agus le gach duine atá ar an choiste.  Tá ról mór le himirt againn agus tá súil agam go mbeimid in ann é sin a dhéanamh agus an coiste á chur ar bun againn.  Beidh a lán déileáil leis an tacaíocht a fuair muid ón phobal agus ónár bpáirtithe chun é seo a dhéanamh.  We have an important role ahead of us.  We have the faith of our parties placed in us that we will be able to put together a petitions, oversight and investigation procedure that has not existed until now.  That is a major challenge and it will be difficult at times but the electorate has spoken of the need for openness, transparency and accountability and this is one of the mechanisms that will deliver that for the public in future.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SusanOKeeffe" eId="spk_14">
          <from>Senator Susan O’Keeffe</from>
          <p eId="para_36">I also congratulate the Chairman and Vice Chairman.  Ironically, as I was coming into the meeting, I was talking to a man outside Leinster House who quickly raised the culture of secrecy that exists in Ireland.  This was a surprising comment from this man.  He said he looks forward to the new Government being able to lift the veil of secrecy and bring things into the open.  I see this committee playing an important role in that, particularly with the proposed amendment to the Constitution in the autumn, which will allow us to bring accountability and transparency to the heart of Government.  I would like to play a part in that.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">The joint committee went into private session at 3.15 p.m. and adjourned at 3.40 p.m. until 4 p.m. on Wednesday, 20 July 2011.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
