<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2013-01-30" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/31/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2013-01-30" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-01-30/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-09-21" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="AengusOSnodaighSF" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Aengus-Ó-Snodaigh.D.2002-06-06" showAs="Aengus Ó Snodaigh"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="CharlieMcConalogue" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Charlie-McConalogue.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Charlie McConalogue"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JimmyHarte" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jimmy-Harte.S.2011-05-25" showAs="Jimmy Harte"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelMcCarthy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-McCarthy.S.2002-09-12" showAs="Michael McCarthy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PeadarToibin" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Peadar-Tóibín.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Peadar Tóibín"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PeterMathews" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Peter-Mathews.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Peter Mathews"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="RichardBoydBarrett" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Richard-Boyd-Barrett.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Richard Boyd Barrett"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>COMHCHOISTE UM FHORMHAOIRSIÚ AR AN TSEIRBHÍS PHOIBLÍ AGUS ACHAINÍOCHA</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Joint Committee on Public Service Oversight and Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2013-01-30">Dé Céadaoin, 30 Eanáir 2013</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2013-01-30">Wednesday, 30 January 2013</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">The Joint Committee met at 05:00 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">MEMBERS  PRESENT:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_1">
                  <person refersTo="#RichardBoydBarrett">Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_2">
                  <person refersTo="#JimmyHarte">Senator Jimmy Harte</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#NoelHarrington">Deputy Noel Harrington</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#KathrynReilly">Senator Kathryn Reilly.*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelHealyRae">Deputy Michael Healy-Rae</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#KevinHumphreys">Deputy Kevin Humphreys,*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#PadraigMacLochlainn">Deputy Pádraig Mac Lochlainn</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#PeterMathews">Deputy Peter Mathews</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_9">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelMcCarthy">Deputy Michael McCarthy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_10">
                  <person refersTo="#CharlieMcConalogue">Deputy Charlie McConalogue</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_11">
                  <person refersTo="#MichelleMulherin">Deputy Michelle Mulherin</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_12">
                  <person refersTo="#AengusOSnodaighSF">Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_3">* In the absence of Deputy Derek Nolan and Senator Trevor Ó Clochartaigh, respectively.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#AengusOSnodaighSF">CLERK TO THE COMMITTEE IN THE CHAIR.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Election of Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:00:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">We are now in public session and have a quorum. The first item on our agenda is the election of the Chairman to the committee. I must ask for nominations for the position.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_14">I propose Deputy Pádraig Mac Lochlainn.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelMcCarthy" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Michael McCarthy<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">I second that nomination.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">As there are no other nominations, I invite Deputy Pádraig Mac Lochlainn to take the Chair for the remainder of the proceedings.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i> Deputy Pádraig Mac Lochlainn took the Chair.</i>
        </summary>
        <speech by="#JimmyHarte" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Senator Jimmy Harte<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_17">I congratulate Deputy Mac Lochlainn on his election and look forward to working with him. This committee is relatively new but I am sure Deputy Mac Lochlainn will get a handle on it fairly quickly. It is a very important committee and I am glad that a fellow Donegal man is in the Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelMcCarthy" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Deputy Michael McCarthy<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">I congratulate Deputy Mac Lochlainn on his appointment and wish him well. He is arriving at the right time. We have dealt with the issues and discovered the role of the committee, in many respects. It is going to be very challenging but very exciting. I am surrounded by Donegal people in Leinster House. My personal assistant is from Donegal and her father sits to my right on this committee. I wish the Chairman well and I know he will bring his own unique political experience and expertise to the position. I assure him of our co-operation at all times in order to ensure that the committee does its work effectively and fairly.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_7">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">I thank Deputy Michael McCarthy for his kind words and I note that another Deputy from Donegal has just arrived.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">Gabhaim comhghairdeachas leis an gCathaoirleach agus tá a fhios agam go ndéanfaidh an coiste ar fad amach as seo an obair mhaith a rinne sé go dtí seo. It is a challenging time for the committee. We are only beginning to get our teeth into the work that has been set out for us. It was a long time in gestation but there is a programme of work in place now which would be challenging on its own but we all have our other duties to attend to as well. It has been shown so far that everybody on the committee works well together and hopefully that will continue so that we can get through the workload.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#CharlieMcConalogue" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Deputy Charlie McConalogue<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">I join with other members of the committee in wishing the Chairman well in his new role, which will be very challenging. It is a difficult committee that is in the early stages of its life. At the same time, it is receiving a lot of attention. There will be a lot of work involved and I wish the Chairman well. I thought that by getting elected to the Dáil I would get away from being at committee meetings chaired by Deputy Mac Lochlainn. Obviously I was wrong but I wish him all the best and look forward to working with him.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_10">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_22">Obviously, I have worked with Senator Harte and Deputy McConalogue in Donegal and we have worked well together on various issues in the county. I know from conversations I have had with some of the committee members that they are very ambitious for this committee and are determined, on an all-party basis, to put citizens at the heart of Parliament and to make them feel that their concerns and recommendations on changes of policy are taken on board. There is already a considerable volume of petitions that we must work through and I am looking forward to the challenge in the time ahead.</p>
          <p eId="para_23"> I thank the members. It is an honour to be elected as Chairman of this committee and I know that, as a team, we are all determined to work with the citizens. This is a very open Parliament. If one takes the audiovisual room, there is never a day when the Dáil is sitting, when there is not a civic society group in there, making the case for change. The Houses have approximately 100,000 visitors per year, making this one of the most open parliaments in the world. We are very proud of our democracy and this committee is another aspect of that. I thank members.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">Well done.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_12">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T17:10:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">Deputy Boyd Barrett is my next door neighbour when we come to vote. Thank you, Deputy. We will now go into private session.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i> The joint committee went into private session at 5.10 p.m. and resumed in public session at 6.35 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_13">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_26">The first petition for consideration is petition No. P00034/12, Mr. Matt Kerrigan on behalf of Ms Sharon Kerrigan concerning the rejection of an application for a disadvantaged area scheme grant in 2008 by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_14">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_27">We need to seek clarification on several issues the petitioner has raised. Through the investigations of the secretariat, we have uncovered that the 2008 application form was cross-referenced to the 2005 application with regard to cross-compliance which seems to support the petitioner’s assertion that he acted in good faith and not, as was suggested by the Department, fraudulently in claiming this payment. That seems to provide evidence. There may be other issues we need to look at but it suggests there is a genuine case to be examined. We should seek clarification on this matter.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_15">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_28">I agree there are matters of clarification that need to be addressed. I know the Ombudsman has made a decision on this case. There are issues surrounding the operation of and qualification for the grants scheme. There is also the issue of penalties arising which seems to connote there has been some wrongdoing or fraud. We should bring it forward for further clarification.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_16">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_29">Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_30"> The next petition for consideration by the committee is petition No. P00061/12 from Ms Patricia O'Neill asking the Government to sponsor a media campaign for suicide prevention similar to its drink-driving campaign.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_17">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_31">The petitioner has a valid case that, given the scale of suicide rates, the State should have a similar campaign that it had for drink-driving. It would serve a useful purpose if we invited the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health to the committee to outline her plans for a State campaign to tackle suicide which is blighting our country.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_18">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_32">I support that proposal. The recent report showing a dramatic increase in suicide levels over the past several years, particularly among young people, means this is an issue that we need to take seriously. The suggestion that there would be a national campaign sponsored by the Government on suicide awareness would be absolutely beneficial.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_19">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_33">I agree with that. It would be a timely conversation with the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, and an expert with vast experience in this area. The levels of stress, both psychological and financial, and alcohol-related depression have surged in line with levels in Greece. We have to diagnose the problem and then seek remedies, as well as educating people on how to alleviate the distress.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_20">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_34">Is it agreed the committee will write to the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, to request her to come before the committee to outline her strategy on suicide awareness? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_35">The committee is supportive of the petitioner in this case.</p>
          <p eId="para_36"> Petitions Nos. P00050/12, P00070/12 and P00071/12 deal with the need for legislation and guidelines on the height of trees. The petitioners are Mr. Michael Byrne, Mr. Denis Moran and Dr. Jean Clarke and all three have made similar petitions.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_21">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_37">This is an issue that most of us have come across as public representatives. It appears there is a gap in the legislation or regulations in this area. The Minister for Justice and Equality has indicated that his Department is working on legislation to provide for some sort of scheme of compulsory mediation and restrictions on height.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_22">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_38">Local authority by-laws.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_23">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_39">We should press the Minister on when the legislation will be introduced and suggest that he might look to the UK and elsewhere for templates for regulating this area.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_24">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_40">I agree with Deputy Boyd Barrett. Other countries have introduced legislation governing the height of trees in suburban areas. The Minister is suggesting that mediation may be a solution but the more practical option is to address the matter through local authority by-laws on a case-by-case basis. Local authorities could introduce by-laws to deal with the overhanging aspect of trees where they pose a danger to other properties. Planning permission is required in local authority areas for any structure over a certain height but trees can grow higher than, for example, bungalows or two-storey houses. They also pose a danger to houses during major weather events and, if we ever have an opportunity to enjoy the sunshine again, they can cause distress to people who have planned their gardens. We should encourage the Minister to fast-track legislation to put pressure on local authorities to pass by-laws. I suggest that we seek clarity from the Minister on a timetable for his proposals. Perhaps we could also write to local authority managers to suggest they consider by-laws similar to those in effect in Britain. This would alleviate the stress on people like the petitioners.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_25">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_41">I agree with my colleagues. Permanent buildings and structures do not grow further once they have been allowed through the planning system and constructed. However, trees, ivy and other vegetation can cause considerable damage to neighbouring properties. A framework of local authority by-laws could cover trees and other vegetation. Some plants have noxious seeds which can cause asthma. This does not need to become a bureaucratic and centralised big brother system. The intention is to keep trees and plants tidy, out of consideration for neighbours and other people.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_26">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_42">Is it agreed that we will write to the Departments of the Environment, Community and Local Government and Justice and Equality to get clarification on the issues raised? Agreed. At the committee's next meeting on Wednesday, 6 February we will begin in public session at 4 p.m. to hold a discussion with the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, and enter private session afterwards. The intention in subsequent meetings is to commence in private session at 4 p.m. in order to deliberate on petitions and then enter public session at 5 p.m.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_27">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_43">I wish the Chairman well in his new role.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#RichardBoydBarrett" eId="spk_28">
          <from>Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_44">I concur.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeadarToibin" eId="spk_29">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-01-30T18:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_45">I thank the members.</p>
          <p eId="para_46"> The joint committee adjourned at 6.45 p.m. until 4 p.m. on Wednesday, 6 February 2013.</p>
        </speech>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
