SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:40:00+01:00	Petition No. P00018/19 relates to rental properties. The decision of the committee is to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Finance to the petitioner. Is that agreed?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	The point is well made. I will move on. The decision is that we will forward a copy of the response from the Department of Finance to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. Petition No. P00023/19 is from Mr. Wayne Hester. He would like to see 30 April designated a public holiday in honour of Riverdance. It is decided that we will forward a copy of the response from the Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	Petition No. P00034/19 is from Ms Tanya O'Neill, who would like to see new labelling on all non-recyclable packaging stating that it is not recyclable. We have agreed that we would forward a copy of the response from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment to the petitioner. We will not quite close the petition yet but will give it further consideration.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	The proposal before us is that we communicate with Repak and perhaps ask it to consider the content of the petition and respond on the work it is doing. To be fair, the response from the Department is comprehensive in answering the issues raised by the petitioner. We are going off on a tangent to the extent that it is not possible to adhere to what is being specifically sought in the petition. However, members understand the importance of packaging, which is one of the biggest issues in the area of climate action. It would be useful for the committee to gain an understanding of the position of Repak and industry representatives on this agenda. Is it agreed that we keep the petition open, communicate with Repak and see where we go from there? Agreed. Petition No. P00035/19 seeks to have more funding allocated to create additional and larger autism spectrum disorder, ASD, classes and special classes in mainstream schools. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Department of Education and Skills to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	Is there a proposal before us to keep the petition open?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	A report was published by the relevant committee in October 2018. Like every other public representative here, we are all inundated with people contacting us about a range of issues in this area, from assessments to issues concerning bricks and mortar and the provision of capital expenditure. If we look at the issue narrowly through the prism of Clondalkin, I propose that we close the petition.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	There is a wider issue and the solution may be as simple as this committee communicating with the Department and the relevant line committee, as per Standing Orders, asking if there has been any response or update to the 2018 report. It is such a live issue. The numbers are increasing all the time. I propose that we close the petition but write to the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Education and Skills and ask the committee to have regard to the petition we received. Is that agreed?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	That is agreed.  It is deemed that Petition No. P00042/19 is inadmissible, as per Standing Orders, and we will inform the petitioner as to the reasons. Is that agreed? Agreed. I understand Deputy Buckley wants to raise an issue under any other business.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T14:50:00+01:00	I propose that we discuss the matter in private session, before we adjourn. Is that agreed? Agreed.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2019-10-23T15:00:00+01:00	I refer Deputy Buckley to the discussion we have just had on the petition we received from the Save Fermoy Weir and Save Our Salmon group. We are in receipt of correspondence from the group rebutting in a comprehensive document the submissions laid before the committee and spoken to by individual stakeholders on 3 July. It is proposed that we note the correspondence from the stakeholders in Fermoy and submit the latest correspondence to each of the stakeholders, including the line Departments and State agencies that were party to the particular petition hearing at this committee, asking them to respond to each of the points raised in rebuttal to the points made on 3 July 2019. Is that agreed? Agreed.
