[<p eid="para_6">I thank members for providing a quorum. We will now go into private session.</p>]
[<p eid="para_7">I propose that we dispense with some official business before we hear from our guests, who are very welcome.</p>, <p eid="para_8">Before we commence, the usual provisos apply regarding the use of mobile phones. They need to be switched off or put on airplane mode. This meeting needs to adjourn at 4 p.m. to facilitate a meeting of another committee in this room.</p>, <p eid="para_9"> Petition No. P0003/17 is from Mr. Brian Houlihan. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response, including submissions received from the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. </p>, <p eid="para_10"> Petition No. P00011/19 is from Mr. Ben Marren. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport be forwarded to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. </p>, <p eid="para_11"> On Petition No. P00014/19, it is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Departments of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and Business, Enterprise and Innovation to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. </p>, <p eid="para_12"> On Petition No. P00022/19, it is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Department of Justice and Equality and a copy of the report of the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>, <p eid="para_13"> On Petition No. P00041/19, it is deemed that the petition is inadmissible in accordance with Standing Order 111C (1)(<i>a</i>), under which a petition is inadmissible if it requests the Dáil to do anything other than the Dáil has the power to do. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>]
[<p eid="para_15">Petition No. P00044/19 from Mr. Robert Ewing concerns a dispute over land ownership and subsequent court cases dating back to the 1980s. It is proposed that the committee deem the petition inadmissible in accordance with Standing Order 111C (1)(<i>f</i>) and correspond with the petitioner informing him that this petition is deemed inadmissible and returning the supporting documents. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>]
[<p eid="para_16">We will now deal with Petition No. P00036/18 from Mr. Paul Kavanagh, which is the subject of our public consultation today. I welcome the witnesses and the people in the Visitors Gallery. This petition concerns the Fermoy weir on the river Blackwater in County Cork. It states that the State has failed to adhere to the water framework directive and that the structures of the weir have deteriorated which, in turn, is affecting the safe migration of salmon and other species. This is the third time that the committee has considered this petition.</p>, <p eid="para_17"> In accordance with procedure, I am required to draw the attention of attendees to the fact that by virtue of section 17(2)(<i>l</i>) of the Defamation Act 2009, witnesses are protected by absolute privilege in respect of their evidence to the joint committee. However, if they are directed by it to cease giving evidence on a particular matter and continue to so do, they are entitled thereafter only to qualified privilege in respect of their evidence. They are directed that only evidence connected with the subject matter of these proceedings is to be given and asked to respect the parliamentary practice to the effect that, where possible, they should not criticise or make charges against any person or entity by name or in such a way as to make him, her or it identifiable. I wish to advise the witnesses that opening statements and any other documents submitted to the committee may be published on the committee's website after this meeting.</p>, <p eid="para_18"> Members are reminded of the long-standing parliamentary practice to the effect that they should not comment on, criticise or make charges against a person outside the Houses or an official, either by name or in such a way as to make him, her or it identifiable.</p>, <p eid="para_19"> The opening statement and submissions from the witnesses have been circulated to members. I remind the witnesses that their presentations should not exceed ten minutes in duration but they may be shorter. The shorter the presentation, the more time there will be for a questions and answers session in order that we can shed some light on the issues at hand.</p>, <p eid="para_20"> I welcome Mr. Niall Healy and Mr. Kevin Morey from Cork County Council; Mr. Denis Maher, Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment; Dr. Greg Forde, head of operations, Inland Fisheries Ireland; Mr John Sydenham and Mr. Ezra MacManamon, Office of Public Works; Ms Cliona O'Brien, wildlife inspector in the scientific unit, National Parks and Wildlife Service, NPWS; and Mr. Colin Byrne and Ms Deirdre Dunworth, Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government.</p>, <p eid="para_21"> I invite Mr. Niall Healy to make his opening statement.</p>]
[<p eid="para_34">Does somebody have a phone on?</p>]
[<p eid="para_37">I apologise, but there is definitely a phone on. It is impossible to record the proceedings if a phone is on. Will our guests check that all their phones are off?</p>]
[<p eid="para_48">I thank Mr. Morey and Mr. Healy for their presentation. I invite Mr. Maher to make his opening statement. I understand it is a joint statement on behalf of the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and Inland Fisheries Ireland.</p>]
[<p eid="para_66">I thank Mr. Maher. I propose we hear from Mr. John Sydenham.</p>]
[<p eid="para_73">I thank Mr. Sydenham. Mr. Byrne has the floor on behalf of the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government.</p>]
[<p eid="para_83">I thank Mr. Byrne. That concludes the presentations. Do members wish to pose questions? I call Deputy Buckley.</p>]
[<p eid="para_90">Are the Deputy's questions directed at any of our guests in particular?</p>]
[<p eid="para_98">Do those proceedings specifically relate to the weir on the River Blackwater?</p>]
[<p eid="para_101">Briefly, does this form part of the statutory consents required?</p>]
[<p eid="para_108">Does Deputy Buckley have any further questions?</p>]
[<p eid="para_114">I will go straight into some questions. My first is for the local authority representatives. I do not think there is any ambiguity about the fact that the structure is owned by Cork County Council. That is correct, is it not?</p>]
[<p eid="para_116">We have a submission here which is an observation from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment. It is one of the documents which is part of the file before us. I will quote directly from it.</p>, <p class="indent_1" eid="para_117">It is also understood that Fermoy Town Council (now Cork County Council) originally agreed the repair works would be undertaken by OPW as part of the Fermoy Flood Relief Scheme, and would be paid for by the Council. However, the Council did not proceed with repair works as part of the Flood Relief Scheme, but rather advised DCCAE [that is, the Department] that the works on the ancillary fish pass solution were included as part of the tender process for Phase II of the Flood Relief Works. The Council then advised that as tender prices received were in excess of what was originally envisaged, they were proceeding with the Flood Relief Works but would be investigating the procedures for retendering separately for the fish pass.</p>, <p eid="para_118">Can either Mr. Healy or Mr. Morey clarify how they interpret this statement from a local authority perspective?</p>]
[<p eid="para_120">I assume Mr. Sydenham is, from an OPW point of view, corroborating that statement by Cork County Council in respect of the observation made by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment. Forgive me if we are getting into surreal territory here but, as a local public representative and a Teachta Dála, I find it extraordinary that we have all the silos of Government in one room. Whether a local authority, IFI, whichever Department or the OPW, there is a certain amount of: "We do not hold the funds to do the job." The points have been made by previous speakers. There needs to be a whole-of-government approach to this. We take at face value and in good faith every statement made today. Regarding overall Government expenditure, I do not buy the arguments about voted expenditure or voted funding and line Departments. Creative mechanisms can always be found to find a relatively small parcel of money to do a job that would meet all the State's obligations, and that is the point. It is the State that has these obligations in respect of EU legislation and directives.</p>, <p eid="para_121">As Chairman, I perceive that we are hiding behind certain directives. We are saying that there is a statutory obligation and that statutory consents are required. This has been very enlightening because it has highlighted the clear line of demarcation that seems to exist between Departments in respect of who holds the can.</p>, <p eid="para_122"> The times in which we are living are not as constrained as 2011. Considering the figures of €1.34 million and €1.7 million in their entirety in the context of overall Government expenditure, one would be hopeful that all stakeholders could come to some agreed, co-ordinated and unified position in tandem with the stakeholders on the ground so that this could be funded. I fail to understand what the €350,000 will buy. We have heard from TJ O'Connor and Associates and White Young Green. There have been other reports on the needs in this regard. For the sake of argument, we will call what is on the table a northern relief pass. There is also a repair and restoration project. They represent two discrete budget lines. The council says that it does not have the funding to carry out either project. It has extended its lámh amach to the Minister for a few bob, a small amount of money, for more consultation. Does it not understand why the people of Fermoy are exasperated and weary at this stage?</p>]
[<p eid="para_124">My understanding is that the local authority is seeking a loan facility from the European Investment Bank, EIB. Will Mr. Morey confirm that? I refer to a loan facility for general purposes.</p>]
[<p eid="para_126">Has that loan facility been secured? How much is available under it?</p>]
[<p eid="para_128">Cork County Council has publicised the fact that it is seeking this facility.</p>]
[<p eid="para_130">The public perception was certainly that it had been secured, if I may be bold enough to say so.</p>]
[<p eid="para_132">Everybody, including the various stakeholders here, agrees that Cork County Council owns the structure and has responsibilities in respect of heritage, conservation, protecting local amenity, and the migration of fish under the habitats directive and the water framework directive. If the Department of the Minister, Deputy Murphy, is saying, as I interpret it, that it is an issue for the OPW or Inland Fisheries Ireland, the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment is saying that it is a matter for the council, and the OPW is saying that it is not a matter for its office, it seems that all roads lead back to the council. In the absence of any signal from the witnesses representing the line Departments or of a political cheque being written, is it beyond the bounds of possibility that this could be funded through an EIB loan facility? I am not playing devil's advocate here. I am trying to find a solution or to find some ground on which we can start talking about solutions. Would Cork County Council consider such a proposal?</p>]
[<p eid="para_134">To unpack what Mr. Healy has said, the loan facility is not guaranteed. It has not been secured and therefore the repair and restoration of the weir and fish pass is not being considered as a potential project to fund through it. Is that a fair assumption?</p>]
[<p eid="para_136">The council is not considering the repair and restoration of the weir in Fermoy and a northern bypass as projects to be funded through the loan facility that may be offered by the EIB.</p>]
[<p eid="para_138">It falls outside it. That is the unambiguous answer I am looking for. If it cannot be funded through the loan facility, we are now back to either the local authority's own resources or central government. It is effectively one or the other. Is that a fair assessment?</p>]
[<p eid="para_140">How much does the council have in the kitty at the moment? It is mapping out the potential cost of works. Does it have money in the kitty to meet its statutory obligations? Does it have anything put aside?</p>]
[<p eid="para_142">Is Mr. Healy referring to the seed funding of €175,000?</p>]
[<p eid="para_144">That is all the council has towards the cost of this project.</p>]
[<p eid="para_146">Before I bring Mr. Morey back in, did Mr. Sydenham want to say anything? He was signalling.</p>]
[<p eid="para_149">Does it include any parameters?</p>]
[<p eid="para_151">I think I understand what Mr. Morey is saying. We live in a world of couched language here. Will Mr. Morey distil his point so that I can internalise and understand it? Is he saying that the parameters or loan criteria are being set out in general terms?</p>]
[<p eid="para_153">We are back to central government again. There is a political prerogative which has to be brought to bear here. That seems to be the bottom line. Rather than concluding matters here, with the agreement of the committee, I suggest that we have to digest what has been said. Some of us are familiar with this issue and have an overview of it because we have had meetings at individual level with the witnesses over the years. I believe that this may be the first time that all of the stakeholders have come into one room and given their positions. We now know what those positions are, as frustrating as it may be to hear him, although I say that respectfully. We are talking about individual silos and not a cross-governmental approach to this. I accept the witnesses' bona fides. They all have vast experience and we have had personal experience of that in the past, with quite robust interactions in some instances. With the permission of the one member who remains, Deputy Buckley, I propose to express our gratitude and then take the witnesses' submissions under advisement and consider them further. Perhaps the committee will then draw up a set of conclusions based on the submissions received. The petition would remain open. Did Ms O'Brien wish to speak again?</p>]
[<p eid="para_155">Ms O'Brien has just opened another silo but we will engage with the Department. The witnesses will all be back in three weeks and officials of the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport will be here. I appreciate Ms O'Brien's intervention.</p>, <p eid="para_156"> We are trying to distil this and reach a fair assessment of what the positions are. Some of us have been living and breathing this issue and the people of Fermoy know the issue inside out at this stage. It should be accepted that there is one stakeholder group that involves local angling and rowing interests and has an interest in local amenities, including providing for people with disabilities. Rowing has become a key sport in the country and we have to recognise Fermoy's status in that regard. The Munster Blackwater is a key reference river for salmon, although there are questions about that status. We all want to find a solution and we will all work with Government to that end.</p>, <p eid="para_157"> I propose that we leave the petition open. I thank the witnesses for attending. I believe all documents, no matter how indicative they are, even drawings or schematics that have been laid before us, should be placed in the public domain. That includes the local authority document but the witnesses can discuss that with their colleagues. It does not necessarily mean that they will be interpreted by people accessing them in the public domain in a literal fashion if it is clearly communicated that the documents from the consulting engineers, TJ O'Connor &amp; Associates, are merely indicative high level documents and are not to be interpreted any other way. I note the request that the witnesses have made about not having these be published on the website. I ask that they reconsider that. The committee tries to publish all materials and keep everything online so that everybody has access. The witnesses' public statement has been to the effect that it is a high level document and not a finished document. The witnesses might consider that, if Mr. Morey and Mr. Healy want to come back to us.</p>, <p eid="para_158"> We will send the opening statements to the petitioner. We intend to keep the petition open because there is more work to be done on this. We are genuinely grateful to the witnesses for attending and giving their time. This is our final meeting before the recess. I thank everybody who has submitted a petition and those who have attended. I thank the staff in the secretariat who do an excellent job in preparing documents and interfacing with the public. They are the A team in that regard. I thank all of the staff who record these proceedings and our press people. Much work goes into preparing a committee meeting and I acknowledge those who work on our behalf.</p>]
