[<p eid="para_9">Apologies have been received from Deputy Dara Murphy. Members will be aware of the usual proviso on mobile phones so I will now switch mine to airplane mode.</p>]
[<p eid="para_10">We will now deal with Petition No. P00011/18 from Ms Josephine Boles. The decision of the committee is that we correspond again with the Department of Education and Skills and ask for further information regarding mandatory autism spectrum disorder, ASD, teaching for all teachers and forward a copy of the reply from the Department of Education and Skills to the petitioner and inform them that the petition remains open. Is that agreed?</p>]
[<p eid="para_12">Yes. Is Senator Buttimer making a proposal?</p>]
[<p eid="para_14">I agree with the suggestion and if there is a formal proposal then I think we should do that. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>]
[<p eid="para_16">If there is a proposal from a committee member it can be considered by the wider committee.</p>]
[<p eid="para_18">The petition remains open. We want to get a specific response from the Department of Education and Skills in respect of the specific question asked by the petitioner. There is a proposal to invite the Minister of State in, and Senator Ruane is making a proposal to invite one of the stakeholder groups that works in this specific area. Senator Ruane can make a formal proposal and seek agreement, then it is a matter for the committee to agree. Is she making such a proposal?</p>]
[<p eid="para_20">There is a proposal to invite AsIAm before us as part of this petition to discuss further the very issues in respect of restraint and teaching.</p>]
[<p eid="para_22">That is one element of it. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>, <p eid="para_23"> I will move on to the next petition. The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00036/18 from Mr. Paul Kavanagh. The petition concerns the Fermoy weir on the River Blackwater in County Cork. I propose that we correspond with Cork County Council to ask for an update on the status of this issue and that we would forward a copy of the reply from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment to the petitioner and inform him that this petition remains open. I also propose that we invite the petitioner and possibly one other stakeholder to come before us in this committee for a short interaction in respect of discussing the issues that are at play concerning the River Blackwater in Fermoy. Is that agreed?</p>]
[<p eid="para_25">The issue concerns the collapse of the weir on the River Blackwater in Fermoy. It is also in respect of the imposition or construction of a fish pass. There is a suggested breach of boat structures, which have to be repaired. There is also the question of whether Ireland is in compliance with EU directives in respect of the safe migration of fish, particularly salmon. That is causing significant consternation for fishing interests on the ground but also there is the question of whether the Government is to fund the repairs or whether because Cork County Council is the owner of the weir it has the obligation. There is also the question of what that budget would be. The petitioners are seeking to have the issue addressed and for clarity to be provided in respect of who, in effect, would foot the bill.</p>]
[<p eid="para_27">It is a significant undertaking.</p>]
[<p eid="para_30">We have agreed the proposals in respect of that petition.</p>, <p eid="para_31"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P0008/19 from Mr. Darragh Fitzgerald. His petition would like to see the Freedom of Information, FOI, Act extended to the Office of the President. Do any members wish to comment?</p>]
[<p eid="para_35">What we propose is that we correspond with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform to ask for an update on the issue, when available, with a view to reviewing this within a six-month timeframe. We will forward a copy of the response from the Department to the petitioner and inform him that the petition remains open. That speaks partly to the concerns that have been agreed. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>, <p eid="para_36"> The final petition for consideration today is Petition No. P00012/19 from Mr. Robert Ewing. The petition appears to concern a dispute over land ownership and subsequent legal proceedings dating back to the 1980s. What we propose to do is to deem the petition inadmissible in accordance with Standing Order 111C (i)(a), and to correspond with the petitioner informing him the petition is inadmissible and to return the supporting documents.</p>, <p eid="para_37">Is that agreed? Agreed. I thank Senator Kelleher and Deputy Denise Mitchell for their time on the committee and in their place I formally welcome Senator Ruane and Deputy Buckley. I look forward to working with them. I also note the apologies from Deputy Heydon. I propose that we adjourn the meeting until Wednesday, 10 April 2019 at 1.30 p.m. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>, <p eid="para_38"> The joint committee adjourned at 2.05 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 10 April 2019.</p>]
