SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:30:00+01:00	As we have the required number of members present I propose that we go into public session. Is that agreed? Agreed. We have not received any apologies thus far. I wish to advise members that the usual provisos apply in terms of mobile phones. I propose that we go into private session to deal with some matters. Is that agreed? Agreed.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:40:00+01:00	We propose to consider some of the public petitions, the first of which is No. P00019/18 from Ms Angela Dunne. We propose to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Education and Skills to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. The next petition for consideration is No. P00033/18 from Mr. Daniel Ryan on the issue of freedom of speech. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Department of Justice and Equality and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed. The final petition for consideration is No. P00037/18 from Mr. David Layton. It is proposed that we deem the petition inadmissible in accordance with Standing Order No. 11C(1)(a). Is that agreed? Agreed.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:40:00+01:00	 At a previous meeting, we considered the issue of orchestra services at RTÉ on foot of a petition. To help us further consider this matter, I welcome Mr. Aodán Ó Dubhghaill from RTÉ, the head of RTÉ Lyric FM and RTÉ Orchestras, and Mr. Rory Coveney, special adviser to the director general of RTÉ, and Mr. Mathew Horsman of Mediatique, co-author of the recent review of RTÉ's orchestral services. I advise our witnesses to turn off their mobile phones as they interfere with the sound system and will interfere with the broadcasting of the meeting. By virtue of section 17(2)(l) of the Defamation Act 2009, witnesses are protected by absolute privilege in respect of the evidence they are to give to the committee. If, however, they are directed by it to cease giving evidence on a particular matter and continue to so do, they are entitled thereafter only to qualified privilege in respect of their evidence. They are directed that only evidence connected with the subject matter of these proceedings is to be given and asked to respect the parliamentary practice to the effect that, where possible, they should not criticise or make charges against any person, persons or entity by name or in such a way as to make him, her or it identifiable. I also advise them that the opening statement and any other documents submitted to the committee may be published on the committee website after the meeting. Members are reminded of the long-standing parliamentary practice to the effect that they should not comment on, criticise or make charges against a person outside the House or an official either by name or in such a way as to make him or her identifiable. I invite Mr. Ó Dubhghaill to make his presentation, which we will follow with an interactive question and answer session.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:50:00+01:00	I propose we hear the submission from Mathew. I am dispensing with the formalities here, so forgive me for referring to the witnesses by their first names. It is just the way we operate in this committee and it is much easier. Does Mathew want to add to that and give us his overview?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:50:00+01:00	Please go ahead.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T13:50:00+01:00	I call Deputy Cassells.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:10:00+01:00	I am conscious of time restraints, so we might just stick to the petition.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:20:00+01:00	Does Mr. Ó Dubhghaill wish to add to that?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:20:00+01:00	Is Senator Buttimer okay with that? I will move on. I call Deputy Eugene Murphy.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:20:00+01:00	Is Deputy Murphy happy enough?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:30:00+01:00	I have a few questions myself. In practical terms, how do the oversight and working groups work? What are the groups' modalities? Do they meet on a regular basis? When do they reach their end state? What is the timeline for the completion of that work?
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:30:00+01:00	I do not wish to put words in anybody's mouth and I seek the witnesses' viewpoint but it could be argued that the process is still somewhat nebulous. We have the recommendations. They are very clear. There seems to have been a political welcome and the political mood music - forgive the pun - from the Ministers, Deputies Madigan and Naughten, has been quite positive, if their statements on 5 July and 28 April are anything to go by. There seems to be a clear sense of wanting to engage and wanting to work through to a solution. If I am interpreting the witnesses correctly, we still have something of a gap in terms of how the oversight group works and what the timelines are. It would be very useful for us, when I conclude proceedings here today, to not close any petition, pending further information in respect of the actual process, and to seek more definitive timelines in that regard.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:30:00+01:00	On the point Mr. Ó Dubhghaill made earlier on the stream from Cúil Aodha, Baile Bhúirne and places like that, we have gone from "Mise Éire" right up to Jenny Greene. If one is talking about cultural output and the value, it is very difficult to put a monetary value on something which is so deeply imbedded, cultural and ingrained in the Irish psyche. I believe there is a clear thread between "Mise Éire" and Jenny Greene and people bopping about at Electric Picnic. There is that thread. The tie that binds is the orchestras. We should not lose sight of that. It is important that we, as individual Members of this Oireachtas, ensure that we find some mechanism to support their continuation in every way that we can. I believe I can reasonably speak for my fellow members here when I say that it is for us to give further consideration to what the witnesses have brought to us here today. It has been a very valuable contribution to our understanding. I know there are other mechanisms through which that can be done in this House but the Committee on Public Petitions is the one mechanism we have in which the citizen engages with us. When the citizen engages with us, raises this important issue and garners so many signatures, it is incumbent on us to ensure that we take some of the messages the witnesses have delivered today and feed them back into the political landscape. There is tremendous goodwill. The campaign around loving our orchestras is resonating deeply with anybody who has an appreciation of the cultural output of RTÉ. I thank the witnesses for their contributions here today. They have been very valuable.We will give this further consideration now. We are definitely more educated by virtue of our deliberations with the witnesses today. There are further questions concerning the process, to which this committee must give more consideration. Everybody has largely welcomed the report. I believe that the report is very digestible and easily understood. We just need to further interrogate the workings of the oversight and working group and perhaps hold a further discussion. 
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:40:00+01:00	I appreciate that.
SeanSherlock	 Chairman	2018-10-10T14:40:00+01:00	We will give further consideration to this matter at our next meeting. If we need to invite more witnesses or stakeholders in then we are free to do so. This debate is an important first cut. We wanted to give this particular petition a public airing because of the importance of the subject matter and today's meeting has been a very positive first step in that sense. It is my duty now to finish these proceedings and I thank the witnesses for their appearance here. 
