<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2019-09-25" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2019-09-25" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2019-09-25/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-27" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="EugeneMurphy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Eugene-Murphy.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Eugene Murphy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JerryButtimer" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jerry-Buttimer.S.2007-07-23" showAs="Jerry Buttimer"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PatBuckley" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Pat-Buckley.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Pat Buckley"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2019-09-25">Dé Céadaoin, 25 Meán Fómhair 2019</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2019-09-25">Wednesday, 25 September 2019</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#PatBuckley">Pat Buckley</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#BernardJDurkan">Bernard J. Durkan,*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">* In éagmais / In the absence of Deputy Martin Heydon.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_8">The first petition for consideration is Petition No. P00045/18. It is recommended that the committee will correspond with the National Disability Authority to request its observations on the petition and the responses received, and communicate with the petitioner what action has been taken. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_9"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00019/19. It is proposed that the committee forwards a copy of the response from the Department of Justice and Equality to the petitioner, and then close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00021/19. It is proposed that the committee would keep the petition open and refer it to the appropriate committee for its consideration. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00029/19. It is proposed to keep this petition open, but in doing so we will refer it to the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence, with this committee's agreement. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_12">Given that we have an issue with the number of people leaving the Defence Forces, this petition should certainly be kept open and discussed further. Perhaps the proposed extension would be a way of enticing people back in. I agree with what members are stating in this petition.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_3">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">I thank the Deputy.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_14">I concur with Deputy Eugene Murphy and agree that there should not be an age limit. There is merit in what the petitioner is trying to do in keeping the age profile open. I also concur with the Chairman that it is important for the line committee to examine this issue and come back to us on it. The upper age limit for joining the Garda and the Reserve Defence Force is 35 years. It is more an issue of health, fitness and well-being, rather than age which should not be a barrier. As we got rid of the height requirement for joining An Garda Síochána, I do not see why age should be a factor either. I hope to see the petition escalated to the relevant committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_5">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">I thank the Senator. It is agreed that we will keep the petition open.</p>
          <p eId="para_16"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00031/19. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Defence to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_17"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00032/19. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Health to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_18"> In respect of Petition No. 00033/19, it is proposed that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">I will make one comment. As we are trying to move towards having a paperless society, there is merit in not issuing receipts. I understand some business people might need to keep receipts of transactions, but many shops, petrol stations and other outlets now ask customers whether they want a receipt and many people do not because it is surplus to their needs. We should encourage the Department to look at this issue and perhaps refer the petition to the line committee in order to learn how we can support measures that will reduce both paper and litter. I think there is merit in that suggestion.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_7">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">The Senator has proposed referring the petition to the line committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">I apologise for not raising the issue privately.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_9">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_22">That is no problem. Is the Senator making a formal proposal?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_10">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_23">If the Chairman thinks it would be merited.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_11">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">I will be guided by members of the committee. I see Deputy Buckley nodding his assent.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_12">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">It is a valid point on the basis of proof and so on. I agree with Senator Buttimer.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_26">I apologise again because I should have raised the matter in private session. I did not tune in properly at the time.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_14">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_27">It is proposed that the petition be referred to the line committee for further consideration and kept open. That is agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_28"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00037/19. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to the petitioner and deem the petition to be inadmissable as per the Standing Orders of the committee. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_15">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_29">I am disappointed that this issue did not get as far as the Dáil or the Seanad, but I respect the rules of the committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_16">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_30">One has empathy and sympathy for the circumstances-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_17">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_31">We have democratic rules and regulations which must be acknowledged.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_18">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_32">Indeed.</p>
          <p eId="para_33"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. 00043/19. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_19">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_34">I thank Cork County Council for progressing this issue and preparing some traffic calming measures. I hope it will be successful in getting Government funding for them in 2020.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_20">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_35">I concur with the Deputy, as this concerns a main route of national significance which ensures security of supply of energy resources. This is something we will be watching very closely.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatBuckley" eId="spk_21">
          <from>Deputy Pat Buckley<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_36">We may have to revisit the issue.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_22">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2019-09-25T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_37">It may have to be revisited by the petitioner at some future date. Is it agreed to close the petition? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_38"> I thank members and the secretariat for the haste with which we expedited matters today.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.45 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 23 October 2019.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
