<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-06-13" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-06-13" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-06-13/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-14" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="EugeneMurphy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Eugene-Murphy.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Eugene Murphy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JerryButtimer" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jerry-Buttimer.S.2007-07-23" showAs="Jerry Buttimer"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ShaneCassells" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Shane-Cassells.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Shane Cassells"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-06-13">Dé Céadaoin, 13 Meitheamh 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-06-13">Wednesday, 13 June 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_6">Apologies have been received from Deputy Dara Murphy.</p>
          <p eId="para_7"> I ask members to please turn off their mobile phones. Will they please switch them to airplane mode? The usual provisos apply.</p>
          <p eId="para_8"> In accordance with the standard procedures agreed to by the Committee on Procedure for paperless committees, all documentation for the meeting has been circulated to members on the document database. </p>
          <p eId="para_9"> I propose that we go into private session to deal with some housekeeping matters. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i>The joint committee went into private session at 1.35 p.m. and resumed in public session at 1.46 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_10">The first petition for consideration is petition No. P00023/17 from Ms Judith Clarke and Mr. Shane Dunphy seeking the opening of an autism spectrum disorder, or ASD, unit in all primary and secondary schools. They state that parents often have to bring their children to other counties, towns or locations which are miles away from their homes to access schools with ASD classes. This is the third time we have considered this petition. We propose that the committee forward the response of the Minister for Education and Skills to the petitioners and close the petition. We propose to ask the Department of Education and Skills and the National Council for Special Education, NCSE, to take account of the recommendations of all three advocacy groups, to whom we have reached out on this issue. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ShaneCassells" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Shane Cassells<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_11">As the Chairman said, this petition went back and forth for analysis. This is rightly so because all parliamentarians meet parents in their constituency clinics who are trying to access services for their children. In that respect the response from the autism advocacy organisations was informative because they stressed the most important issue is being able to access the resources when needed. They state that students can access autism classes in both national and secondary schools, and that schools will make provision for an autism class when requested to do so. That is correct, but the issue is that the back up support must be timely. That is the aspect that parliamentarians find most frustrating.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The advocacy organisations point out that 86% of autistic children attend mainstream schools, yet the SNAs require no formal training. I welcome their participation which was helpful to the debate. I thank the petitioners for raising this issue and opening up the debate between the Department of Education and Skills and the advocacy groups. That has been worthwhile.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">I thank Deputy Cassells. I call Senator Buttimer.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_14">I thank the petitioners for submitting the petition. The important point is that we ensure we support the access to services and supports, as outlined in the response. It is also critical that we recognise the investment in autism services through the provision of special classes and special needs assistants. I made the point during our discussion in private session that we need to see a more co-ordinated approach between the different organisations and entities involved in the provision of ASD units whether in primary or post-primary education. Sometimes there is a missed connection in the delivery of services. The advocacy organisation give a detailed response.</p>
          <p eId="para_15"> I accept the Chairman's proposal to close the petition but I think it is important to keep an eye on the roadblocks in the provision of services, notwithstanding the significant investment in autism services. Should another petition on this subject arise, we should revert to it.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_6">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">I thank Senator Buttimer. I call Deputy Murphy.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_7">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_17">I agree with the two previous speakers. I welcome the petition from Ms Clarke and Mr. Dunphy. We must realise that providing an autism spectrum disorder, or ASD, unit in all primary and secondary schools in every county in Ireland presents a challenge, and is particularly challenging in my own county of Roscommon.</p>
          <p eId="para_18">The incidence of autism is particularly high in County Roscommon, but we have not found the reason for it.</p>
          <p eId="para_19"> May I suggest that we invite Autism Ireland to appear before the committee to update ourselves on the situation? I agree with Senator Buttimer that we retain a focus on this issue. There is a great deal of good work being done by schools, by the Department, by parents groups and by the advocacy groups, but it would be a good idea if the Chairman and the secretariat were to organise a discussion with Autism Ireland in the autumn.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_8">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-06-13T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">I appreciate Deputy Eugene Murphy's suggestion and we can liaise with the Joint Committee on Education and Skills to ensure there is no crossover between what we and they do. That is a valid suggestion.</p>
          <p eId="para_21"> The next petition for consideration is petition No. P00025/18. This petition objects to abortion on demand and would like to see abortion on demand up to 12 weeks of pregnancy abolished. It is proposed that the committee deem the petition to be inadmissible under Standing Order 111C(1) (a). Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_22"> The final petition for consideration is petition No. P00010/18. This petition concerns the consolidation of statutory instruments instead of amending them. The petitioner proposes that consolidating statutory instruments would be publicly beneficial as it would make laws more accessible and transparent to all and could result in the reduction of legal fees. It is proposed that the committee would close the petition, forward a copy of the responses from the Office of the Attorney General and the Law Reform Commission to the petitioner and inform the petitioner of the upcoming report by the Law Reform Commission on this issue. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.55 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 27 June 2018.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
