<akomaNtoso xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd ">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#source">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2007-11-01" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/30/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2007-11-01" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/role/debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="mul"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_communications_energy_and_natural_resources/2007-11-01/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-06-25" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor href="/ie/oireachtas/role/debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <analysis source="#source">
        <otherAnalysis xmlns:oir="https://data.oireachtas.ie/ns/1.0" source="#source">
          <oir:volumeReference eId="#vol_None" href="ie/oireachtas/debateRecord/vol/None" showAs="Vol. None"/>
          <oir:numberReference eId="#no_None" href="ie/oireachtas/debateRecord/vol/None/no/None" showAs="No. None"/>
        </otherAnalysis>
      </analysis>
      <references source="#source">
        <TLCOrganization eId="source" href="" showAs="Houses of the Oireachtas"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="generation" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Generation" showAs="Generation"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="reported" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Reported" showAs="Reported"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="publication" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#Publication" showAs="Publication"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="BobbyAylward" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Bobby-Aylward.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Bobby Aylward"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="BrendanKenneally" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Brendan-Kenneally.D.1989-06-29" showAs="Brendan Kenneally"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JimWalsh" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jim-Walsh.S.1997-09-17" showAs="Jim Walsh"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JoeMcHugh" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Joe-McHugh.S.2002-09-12" showAs="Joe McHugh"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JohnCreganFF" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/John-Cregan.S.1998-06-23" showAs="John Cregan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JohnMoloney" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/John-Moloney.D.1997-06-26" showAs="John Moloney"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="LizMcManus" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Liz-McManus.D.1992-12-14" showAs="Liz McManus"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MariaCorrigan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Maria-Corrigan.S.2007-07-23" showAs="Maria Corrigan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MattieMcGrath" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Mattie-McGrath.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Mattie McGrath"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelMoynihan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-Moynihan.D.1997-06-26" showAs="Michael Moynihan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichaelWDArcy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michael-D'Arcy.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Michael D'Arcy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="NoelCoonan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Noel-Coonan.S.2002-09-12" showAs="Noel Coonan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PeterKellyFF" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Peter-Kelly.D.2002-06-06" showAs="Peter Kelly"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SimonCoveney" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Simon-Coveney.D.1998-10-23" showAs="Simon Coveney"/>
        <TLCRole eId="Chair" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/position/chair" showAs="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole eId="Chairman" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/position/chairman" showAs="Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole eId="author" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/role/author" showAs="author"/>
        <TLCRole eId="editor" href="/ie/oireachtas/role/role/editor" showAs="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>COMHCHOISTE UM CHUMARSÁID, FUINNIMH AGUS ACMHAINNÍ NÁDÚRTHA</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>JOINT COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS, ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2007-11-01">Déardaoin, 1 Samhain 2007</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2007-11-01">Thursday, 1 November 2007</docDate>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <heading>Prelude</heading>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">The Joint Committee met at 11.30 a.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">MEMBERS PRESENT:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_1">
                  <person refersTo="#BobbyAylward">Deputy Bobby Aylward,+</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_2">
                  <person refersTo="#MariaCorrigan">Senator Maria Corrigan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnCreganFF">Deputy John Cregan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JimWalsh">Senator Jim Walsh.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#NoelCoonan">Deputy Noel Coonan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#SimonCoveney">Deputy Simon Coveney,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelWDArcy">Deputy Michael D’Arcy,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#PeterKellyFF">Deputy Peter Kelly,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_9">
                  <person refersTo="#BrendanKenneally">Deputy Brendan Kenneally,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_10">
                  <person refersTo="#MattieMcGrath">Deputy Mattie McGrath,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_11">
                  <person refersTo="#JoeMcHugh">Deputy Joe McHugh,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_12">
                  <person refersTo="#LizMcManus">Deputy Liz McManus,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_13">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnMoloney">Deputy John Moloney,*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_14">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelMoynihan">Deputy Michael Moynihan,</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_3">*In the absence of Deputy Peter Power.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_4">+In the absence of Deputy Brendan Kenneally for part of meeting.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#"/>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Election of Chairman.</heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_1">
          <from>Clerk to the Committee</from>
          <p eId="para_15">The first item on the agenda is the nomination and election of a Chairman.  I invite nominations in that regard.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterKellyFF" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Deputy Peter Kelly</from>
          <p eId="para_16">I propose Deputy John Cregan.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelMoynihan" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Michael Moynihan</from>
          <p eId="para_17">I second the proposal.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Clerk to the Committee</from>
          <p eId="para_18">As there are no other nominations, I deem Deputy Cregan elected and call on him to take the Chair.</p>
          <p eId="para_19">Deputy John Cregan took the Chair.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_20">I thank members for electing me and I also thank those who proposed and seconded my nomination.  It is a great honour to be elected Chairman of the committee and I look forward to working with all members in a genuine spirit of partnership and co-operation.  I hope we will be able to combine our skills and enthusiasm in order to make the committee as productive as its predecessor.</p>
          <p eId="para_21">I welcome the members of the committee, particularly those who are newly elected to the Dáil and Seanad.  In the 29th Dáil the committee dealt with communications, marine and natural resources.  The marine function has now been transferred to other Departments.  The remit of the previous committee was wide-ranging and I pay tribute to its members who have left us a legacy and a major body of work.  It is my wish that we should build on the latter.</p>
          <p eId="para_22">I will endeavour to be as fair and as impartial as possible to all members of the committee.  In my opinion, a united, non-partisan approach, under which all members can contribute and feel that their efforts are worthwhile, will yield the best results and add value to the parliamentary committee process.</p>
        </speech>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Election of Vice Chairman.</heading>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_23">We now move to the election of the Vice Chairman.  Standing Order 90(2) provides that as soon as may be after the election of a Chairman, every committee shall elect one of its members to be Vice Chairman.  I now call for nominations for the position of Vice Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelMoynihan" eId="spk_7">
          <from>Deputy Michael Moynihan</from>
          <p eId="para_24">I propose Deputy Peter Kelly for the position of Vice Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MattieMcGrath" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Mattie McGrath</from>
          <p eId="para_25">I second the proposal.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_26">As there are no other nominations, I declare Deputy Kelly elected as Vice Chairman.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_4">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee.</heading>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_10">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_27">Perhaps we should take this opportunity to discuss what would be an appropriate time slot for our meetings.  The allocation of such slots is a matter for the working group of committee Chairmen.  I propose that my hands should not be tied as I seek, in conjunction with the clerk to the committee, to secure the best time slot possible for the joint committee.  In this regard, I will be obliged to take account of the Orders of Business in the Dáil and Seanad, the rota of Ministers taking parliamentary questions and Front Bench and parliamentary party meetings.  If members have particular issues regarding the timing of meetings, they should contact the clerk or me.  Is it agreed that it be left to the Chairman, at the working group of committee Chairmen, to deal with the matter of securing a time slot?  Agreed.  Will members indicate if they have any preferences as regards when the joint committee should meet?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SimonCoveney" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Deputy Simon Coveney</from>
          <p eId="para_28">I congratulate the Chairman on his election.  I look forward to our having a good and robust working relationship.  I also congratulate Deputy Kelly on his election as Vice Chairman.  He and I served on this committee previously and know each other quite well.</p>
          <p eId="para_29">I am not sure how much choice we will have with regard to choosing a time for meetings.  There are more committees in this Dáil but only the same number of meeting rooms and the Chairman will, therefore, face a battle to secure a time slot.  Obviously, we will need to avoid clashes between Dáil business, such as that relating to Priority Questions, and committee meetings.  The next two slots for Priority Questions relating to our area are both scheduled for Thursdays, so we need to avoid a clash.  My preference would be for our meetings to be held on Wednesdays, particularly because I live a long way from Dublin.  I accept, however, that, in the context of securing meeting rooms, Thursdays are less busy.  We shall be obliged to rely on the Chairman's judgment in respect of this matter.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_12">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_30">I wish the Chairman well on his election to the important position he now holds.  I shall do my best to co-operate in any way possible in order to ensure that meetings are carried out in an orderly fashion.  As a new member of the committee, I am on a steep learning curve in respect of my brief.  I agree that it will probably be difficult to find suitable time slots.  It was already difficult in the previous Dáil but with the advent of even more committees, pressure will increase with regard to the allocation of meeting rooms.</p>
          <p eId="para_31">It would not be a great idea to hold meetings on Thursday afternoons because many members will have left to travel home.  I imagine it would be acceptable to hold meetings on Thursday mornings, Tuesday evenings or Wednesdays.  I am extremely flexible regarding when we meet but I do not believe it would be appropriate or feasible to meet on Thursday afternoons.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_32">Are there any other suggestions?  We will try to avoid holding meetings on Thursday afternoons.  I will leave it to the clerk to see what can be achieved in respect of securing a time slot.  I will inform members of the position as soon as matters are finalised.</p>
          <p eId="para_33">There are a number of housekeeping issues to be considered.  Is it agreed that SI 723 of 2007, Electricity Regulation Act 1999 (Trading Arrangements in Electricity)(Revocation) Regulations 2007, does not require consideration?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_14">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_34">We have not had an opportunity to consider this matter in detail.  There is, however, an important issue relating to the area of electricity which must be considered.  It should be stated that the single electricity market for the island commences today.  This is a tremendous step forward and I welcome it.  I hope everything goes to plan.  The official launch does not take place until 12 November but today is important and significant in economic and political terms and it should be noted.</p>
          <p eId="para_35">Concerns have been expressed regarding the possibility of demand outstripping supply and it has been stated that we need to pay close attention to this matter.  I ask that we invite, for example, the CEO of Eirgrid to meet us because, while demand appears to have increased significantly, there are concerns about the age and condition of plants and generating stations.  We could meet the CEO and possibly somebody from the Department to ensure that we are on top of what could be a significant problem not only for industry and our commercial life but for individual householders.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SimonCoveney" eId="spk_15">
          <from>Deputy Simon Coveney</from>
          <p eId="para_36">In regard to the first point raised by Deputy McManus, creating an all-Ireland market for energy is a considerable step forward.  Some confusion has arisen about how it will work in terms of regulation and pricing given that the cost of electricity in the UK has been substantially lower than here.  It would be helpful for the committee if we could invite the key person on regulation in the Republic, Mr. Tom Reeves, to outline how the new system will work in practice.  It is difficult enough to understand how the system works within the Republic without adding the complexity of the North.  That should be the first step for the committee.  It is a development we have sought for quite some time but now that it has officially taken place, the committee should be familiar with the details.</p>
          <p eId="para_37">We could also use the meeting to explore the second issue raised by Deputy McManus.  It was reported in a newspaper today that Eirgrid has expressed concern about whether power generation will be sufficient to meet demand this winter.  If the body that controls power on the grid is saying that, we need to take note.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#NoelCoonan" eId="spk_16">
          <from>Deputy Noel J. Coonan</from>
          <p eId="para_38">I congratulate the Chairman and Vice Chairman on their appointment and look forward to working with committee members.</p>
          <p eId="para_39">I ask that the committee include in its schedule of work the issue of the approximately 200 coalminers from Ballingarry, Arigna and elsewhere in the country who have suffered enormous health and financial problems.  Many are in dire straits as a result of working in the mines.  Their colleagues in Britain have been compensated by the British Government through a scheme established by the European Parliament and they are at a loss as to why they were left out.  They certainly need help and I ask that the committee facilitate them with a meeting in which they can outline their difficulties.  I am sure I have the support of my colleagues, Deputies McGrath and Alyward, whose constituents are also affected.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_17">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_40">Before continuing our discussions, I ask for agreement on the technical matter raised with regard to SI 723/2007.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_18">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_41">Do we need to approve it now?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_19">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_42">Yes.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_20">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_43">What happens if we do not?  We only received it today.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SimonCoveney" eId="spk_21">
          <from>Deputy Simon Coveney</from>
          <p eId="para_44">While it would be convenient for the Chairman if we were to approve it, we do not know what we are approving.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_22">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_45">I understand it does not require approval.  It has been laid before the House and there is a 21-day period in which to revoke it.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_23">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_46">That is a matter for the Dáil to address.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JoeMcHugh" eId="spk_24">
          <from>Deputy Joe McHugh</from>
          <p eId="para_47">I congratulate the Chairman and the Vice Chairman.  The latter may be aware of the local protests being made against the pylons for the cross-Border project.  This committee has a role in ironing out issues before they cause too much public consternation.  I support the proposals to meet someone from Eirgrid and to consider the avenues available to us in terms of putting ESB cables underground.  I am familiar with this issue because it arose in County Donegal when we were prevented by public protests from bringing high-voltage power lines into Gweedore.  This committee might act as a mediator between the public and Eirgrid.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrendanKenneally" eId="spk_25">
          <from>Deputy Brendan Kenneally</from>
          <p eId="para_48">I congratulate the Chairman and Vice Chairman on their appointment.  I was a member of this committee during the last Dáil and one of the issues we addressed in great depth was broadband.  We reviewed the issue every 12 months but found that little progress had been made after the first year.  We should return to the issue because areas remain without broadband access and problems have arisen in respect of uptake even where broadband is freely available.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MattieMcGrath" eId="spk_26">
          <from>Deputy Mattie McGrath</from>
          <p eId="para_49">I congratulate the Chairman and the Vice Chairman on their election and look forward to working with this committee as a new member.  I concur with Deputy Kenneally on the issue he raised, particularly with regard to rural areas.  Less than half a mile outside some major towns, there is no sign of broadband.  Deadlines have repeatedly been broken and people are anxious because they have no idea when they will get broadband.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_27">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_50">I am not clear as to whether we are discussing the work programme or individual matters.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_28">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_51">We have drifted.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_29">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_52">We want to cover a significant number of areas.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_30">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_53">The previous committee dealt with business pertinent to communications, marine and natural resources in a modular fashion.  I suggest that we follow a similar practice but, in the event of an urgent issue arising, we should feel free to interrupt our business to deal with it.  We will deal with the first module between Christmas and Easter.  Energy has been mentioned by several members and, if they feel that area should take precedence over communications or natural resources, it can comprise our first module.   That would provide structure to our work.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_31">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_54">It is a great idea.  However, while we will no longer deal with marine matters, inland fisheries remain part of our remit.  I am concerned that a long time would pass before we deal with issues that are of immediate concern to people.  The issue of miners, for example, should not be left indefinitely before being addressed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_32">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_55">Three different issues were raised as being important.  Members can decide the relative priority of matters but, to create some degree of structure, we should consider a modular approach.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_33">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_56">I suggest we put in writing to the Chairman what we believe should be in the work programme.  We should not be overly definitive because, for example, natural resources could thereby be neglected for six or nine months.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_34">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_57">I accept the Deputy's point but I suggest that we structure our business while allowing ourselves leeway to deal with matters of importance as they arise, regardless of the module with which we are dealing.  I will be inviting submissions to the clerk in respect of members' wishes regarding the structure of the committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SimonCoveney" eId="spk_35">
          <from>Deputy Simon Coveney</from>
          <p eId="para_58">On the modules, the system operated by the previous committee worked well.  The committee focused on particular issues and members got up to speed, following which a report was produced.  The committee produced reports on specific issues such as aquaculture, fisheries and broadband.  I was involved in producing the first of two reports on broadband.  That system worked to a certain extent.  Issues such as communications, energy and natural resources, given potential finds off the coast, are time sensitive.  We will soon have a new national broadband strategy into which the committee should have an input.  That is happening at the same time as there is a threat of power cuts, another issue relevant to the committee.  We should try to create a structure, whereby individual meetings are held to deal with particular modules.  Having a six month timeframe within which to deal with a particular module may not work this time round.  We should ensure we deal with one of the three module at each scheduled meeting.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_36">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_59">I welcome members' views.  A briefing note has been circulated to all members.  It is a requirement of Standing Order 86 that the joint committee prepare and lay before the Houses of the Oireachtas an annual work programme.  Members may suggest proposals for inclusion in it.  I propose that members suggesting specific items for inclusion communicate with the clerk.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#LizMcManus" eId="spk_37">
          <from>Deputy Liz McManus</from>
          <p eId="para_60">Perhaps the Chairman would clarify the following matter following his meeting with the other Chairmen.  A new committee on global warming has been created.  We need a definition of the issues, including energy matters, that will be dealt with by this committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_38">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_61">I have considered that issue and will clarify the matter for members at the earliest opportunity.  It is likely that that committee will receive a large volume of correspondence which will limit members' time to study same.  To better target our work, I suggest the clerk record all correspondence received and that a list of same be circulated to members.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MichaelWDArcy" eId="spk_39">
          <from>Deputy Michael D’Arcy</from>
          <p eId="para_62">Another relevant issue which may come down the tracks quicker than we may anticipate is that of biofuels.  Given the sharp increase in the price of cereals, competition in growing crops and rape seed will be intense in the coming year.  Within 12 to 18 months there will be only three functioning plants in County Wexford to process rape seed oil into biofuel.  Those investing in the plants are concerned that they may not have sufficient crop to run them.  It is possible we may have to import rape seed for processing.  If sufficient land is not made available, landholders will grow whatever is the most profitable crop.  At this time rape seed is not the most profitable.  We will need to address this issue quickly, given that the Houses will be in recess over the Christmas period and in January.  Farmers will shortly move towards sowing rape seed.  The winter crop is in the ground.  We are, therefore, behind in the game already and will need to respond quickly if we are to address the issue.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnCreganFF" as="#Chairman" eId="spk_40">
          <from>Chairman</from>
          <p eId="para_63">I thank members for electing me and assure them I will make every effort to ensure their time spent on this committee will be productive and worthwhile.  As the working group of committee Chairmen has not yet met, we do not have a date for our next meeting.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">The joint committee adjourned 11.55 a.m. <i>sine die.</i>
                </summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
