<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2016-12-14" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2016-12-14" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2016-12-14/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-09-19" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2016-12-14">Dé Céadaoin, 14 Nollaig 2016</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2016-12-14">Wednesday, 14 December 2016</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">MEMBERS  PRESENT:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_1">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Deputy Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_2">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Senator Jerry Buttimer</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Deputy Denise Mitchell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#ColetteKelleher">Senator Colette Kelleher</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Deputy Eugene Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#DenisLandy">Senator Denis Landy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnPaulPhelan">Deputy John Paul Phelan</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#DiarmuidWilson">Senator Diarmuid Wilson.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_3">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">DEPUTY SEAN SHERLOCK IN THE CHAIR.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
        <summary eId="sum_4">
          <i>The joint committee met in private session until 1.45 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2016-12-14T13:40:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2016-12-14T13:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">There are five petitions to be discussed today and we will now deliver our decisions on them. The first petition is No. P00017/16 from Mr. Aidan Devlin regarding kindness and support to native American nations in times of need, with specific reference to the campaign to stop the North Dakota pipeline. We have considered the summary of the petition. As the petition asks the Government to make a statement on a matter that is outside the legislative powers of the State, it is considered inadmissible under Standing Orders. The decision of the committee is to inform the petitioner under the Standing Orders of the committee that the petition is inadmissible and is now closed. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The second petition is No. P00027/16 from Mr. Andrew O'Connell regarding direct debit payments for motor tax in all classes. In its response, the Department of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government has outlined a number of issues with the possible introduction of a direct debit payment. It has confirmed that its officials are monitoring the UK's decision to abolish the requirement to have a motor tax disc. The decision of the committee is to forward to the petitioner a copy of the response received from the Department and to advise him that the committee will respond to this letter recommending that the Department continue monitoring the situation with a view to looking favourably at abolishing the motor tax disc at a future date. In addition, the committee will liaise with the Department of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government to recommend that it should continue monitoring the situation with a view to looking favourably at abolishing the motor tax disc at a future date. We are also proposing to close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The third petition for consideration is No. P00028/16 from Mr. Daniel Lannon and relates to the purported unconstitutionality of the Courts Bill 2016. The decision of the committee is to inform the petitioner of the decision of the Select Committee on Justice and Equality and to close this petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The fourth petition for consideration is No. P00032/16 from Mr. Eamon Honan and argues that the petitions process should be reformed on the basis that the best ideas are not always the most popular. It is recommended to deem the petition inadmissible under Standing Order 111C (1)(g). A petition is admissible unless it is frivolous, vexatious or otherwise constitutes an abuse of the petitions system. It is also recommended that we correspond with the petitioner to outline the petitions process and that we close the petition.</p>
          <p eId="para_13">Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> The final petition for consideration today is No. P00033/16 from Mr. Eamon Honan, proposing to change the name of the Department of Justice and Equality to the Department of Legal Affairs. The decision of the committee is to deem the petition inadmissible and to close the petition. Under Standing Order 111C (1)(g), a petition is admissible unless it is frivolous, vexatious or otherwise constitutes an abuse of the petitions system. Is the committee's recommendation agreed? Agreed. </p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.50 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 25 January 2017.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
