<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-04-18" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-04-18" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-04-18/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-06" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="JerryButtimer" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jerry-Buttimer.S.2007-07-23" showAs="Jerry Buttimer"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-04-18">Dé Céadaoin, 18 Aibreán 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-04-18">Wednesday, 18 April 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Denise Mitchell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#BrendanRyanDublin">Brendan Ryan.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">I láthair / In attendance: Senator John Dolan.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_7">I advise members to turn off their mobile phones or put them into airplane mode.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i> The committee went into private session at 1.32 p.m. and resumed in public session at 1.46 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_8">The first petition for consideration is Petition No. P00025/17. The petitioner is seeking a legislative amendment to be included in budget 2018 to allow him, as a holder of an approved minimum retirement fund, AMRF, to make withdrawals subject to the same rules that applied when he made the investment in 2013. Do any members wish to contribute to this issue? No. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Minister for Finance to the petitioner and to close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_9"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00033/17 from Mr. Robbie O'Sullivan regarding remote working as a means of reducing workplace commuting. The petitioner uses his own commute as an example. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation to the petitioner and to close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_11">I apologise for digressing. I am not asking this question in response to the specific petition. Given the response from the Department, in terms of allowing for flexibility for people to work from home or from a remote location, can we perhaps look at encouraging and promoting the idea of tax incentives? I am aware that the tax incentives are a matter for the Department of Finance. We all know well that there is a huge volume of traffic on our roads, and it is important that we encourage the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, through the use of broadband, and the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, to look at how we can incentivise working from home and to get the national broadband strategy rolled out as quickly as possible.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_12">Certainly. In terms of dealing with the specific petition before us I believe we have agreed an approach.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">I agree with the approach.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_6">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_14">There is a wider societal issue about how we facilitate more home working, but perhaps that is a discussion we could have at our next meeting. We will discuss the points the Senator is raising to see if we should correspond in the context of this petition about the wider societal issue. Is the Senator agreeable to that?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_7">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">Yes.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_8">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00030/17. It is proposed that we close the petition and correspond with the petitioner, informing them of this decision. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_17"> The final petition is Petition No. P00047/17. It is proposed that we close the petition and correspond with the petitioner, informing them of this decision. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">I am hanging a hat loosely on the Central Bank. I do not mean nationalisation. We should promote the issue of literacy around financial products and in dealing with financial institutions. Can we put that in the agenda for a future meeting?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_10">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">Certainly. That is agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JerryButtimer" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Senator Jerry Buttimer<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">I apologise for interrupting.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_12">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-04-18T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">Not at all. This is the place to raise those issues.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_7"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.50 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 2 May 2018.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
