<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-05-31" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-05-31" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-05-31/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-01-28" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="DeniseMitchell" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Denise-Mitchell.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Denise Mitchell"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="EugeneMurphy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Eugene-Murphy.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Eugene Murphy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2017-05-31">Dé Céadaoin, 31 Bealtaine 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2017-05-31">Wednesday, 31 May 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Denise Mitchell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#DiarmuidWilson">Diarmuid Wilson.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnPaulPhelan">John Paul Phelan.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i> The joint committee met in private session until 1.49 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:40:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">We are now in public session. The next item is to record the decisions of the joint committee. The first petition for consideration is No. P000024/16, submitted by Mr. Thomas Mackey, regarding the criteria to qualify for a primary medical certificate. It is proposed, first, to correspond with the Ombudsman and seek his views on the scheme as it currently stands and to request an input on the actions that could be taken to address the needs of the petitioner and, second, to correspond with relevant advocacy groups seeking observations regarding the current eligibility criteria relating to primary medical certificates. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition is No. P000036/16, which was submitted by Mr. Neil Tolan and which proposes the establishment of a regulator for the gambling industry.</p>
          <p eId="para_11">It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department to the petitioner and advise that the petition will remain open. The secretariat will correspond with the Department periodically to seek an update on the progression of legislation. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The next petition for consideration is No. P00001/17 regarding the responsible service of alcohol. It is proposed to correspond once again with the petitioner informing him that, if a response is not received within two weeks of the date of the correspondence, the petition will be closed. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_13"> The next petition is No. P00008/17 from Mr. Martin McGowan. It is proposed to correspond once again with the Department of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government outlining that while the committee welcomes the progression of the Mediation Bill 2017, that Bill does not address the issue of the absence of legislation to tackle overhanging trees. The committee further requests that the Department examine current legislation and regulations in the UK with a view to considering a similar system for Ireland. The committee also requests that the Department report back to it. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department to the petitioner and advise of further steps being taken by the committee. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> The next petition for consideration is No. P00015/17 on widening the eligibility requirements for Irish citizenship by descent. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Justice and Equality to the petitioner and to close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_15"> The next petition is No. P00017/17 from Mr. Mark Llewellyn, entitled "Introduce refundable deposits on bottles and cans in Ireland". It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department to the petitioner and to close the petition. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">May I make a brief comment?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_3">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_17">Yes.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">We should examine this issue. It is a good idea. It would increase costs, but there is a major problem with this type of waste.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_5">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">The Deputy will be aware that the Department published a report, entitled "Review of the Producer Responsibility Initiative Model in Ireland" in July 2014. As part of that review, the introduction of a refundable deposit scheme for bottles and cans was considered. However, the report concluded that the scheme would be inappropriate because there was a scheme in operation by Repak. I agree with the Deputy in that there may be recourse for further examination of what Repak is and does. Perhaps a more appropriate course would be through the line committee responsible for oversight of these matters, if I might make that suggestion.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">That would be acceptable.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_7">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">Is the proposal agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_22"> The final petition for consideration is No. P00019/17 from Mr. Jonny Anderson, entitled, "The Lough Foyle Ferry Service should be maintained by the Irish and British Governments". It is proposed that we forward a copy of the response from the Department to the local authorities pertinent to the Lough Foyle area and seek an update on the matter. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_23">I welcome that recommendation. The ferry is a major and important infrastructural element in the area and was previously funded by the Limavady and Donegal councils. It has been running for ten years and serves tourists and motorists in the area. Given that the region has already been hit by Brexit, we should do everything we can to support it. It is important that we revert to the councils and keep the ferry open.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">I support Deputy Mitchell's comments.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_10">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-05-31T13:50:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">By forwarding a copy of the petition to the relevant local authorities, we can assess their response to us and see how to proceed from there. Keeping it open is the wisest thing to do. Is the proposal agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_26"> As there is no further business, the meeting stands adjourned. I thank members.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.55 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 June 2017.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
