<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2013-06-26" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/31/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2013-06-26" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_public_service_oversight_and_petitions/2013-06-26/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-09-23" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="AengusOSnodaighSF" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Aengus-Ó-Snodaigh.D.2002-06-06" showAs="Aengus Ó Snodaigh"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="NoelHarrington" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Noel-Harrington.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Noel Harrington"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PadraigMacLochlainn" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Pádraig-MacLochlainn.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Pádraig MacLochlainn"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PeterMathews" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Peter-Mathews.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Peter Mathews"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="TrevorOClochartaigh" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Trevor-Ó-Clochartaigh.S.2011-05-25" showAs="Trevor Ó Clochartaigh"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>COMHCHOISTE UM FHORMHAOIRSIÚ AR AN TSEIRBHÍS PHOIBLÍ AGUS ACHAINÍOCHA</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Joint Committee on Public Service Oversight and Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2013-06-26">Dé Céadaoin, 26 Meitheamh 2013</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2013-06-26">Wednesday, 26 June 2013</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">The Joint Committee met at 04:00 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">MEMBERS  PRESENT:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_1">
                  <person refersTo="#CharlesFlanagan">Deputy Charles Flanagan</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_2">
                  <person refersTo="#TrevorOClochartaigh">Senator Trevor Ó Clochartaigh.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#NoelHarrington">Deputy Noel Harrington</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#MichaelHealyRae">Deputy Michael Healy-Rae</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#CharlieMcConalogue">Deputy Charlie McConalogue</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#PeterMathews">Deputy Peter Mathews</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#DerekNolan">Deputy Derek Nolan</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#AengusOSnodaighSF">Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_3">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#PadraigMacLochlainn">DEPUTY PÁDRAIG MAC LOCHLAINN IN THE CHAIR.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
        <summary eId="sum_4">
          <i>The joint committee met in private session until 5 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#PadraigMacLochlainn" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">We have several petitions to consider today. Petition No. P00061/12 from Ms Patricia O'Neill calls for a media campaign, similar to the anti-drink driving campaign, to increase public awareness of suicide. As we have already discussed this matter with the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, I propose that we convey the transcript of the meeting and the opening statements to Ms O'Neill and thereby close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> Petition No. P00043/12 from Mr. Thomas Kevin Walshe relates to the eligibility criteria for the back to education allowance scheme. As we have had the petitioner before the committee to discuss the issue, I propose that we convey the transcript of the meeting and the opening statements to him and thereby close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> Petition No. P00031/12 from Mr. Pat Clarke concerns An Bord Pleanála's position on planning precedent in local authorities. Do members have any comments?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#TrevorOClochartaigh" eId="spk_2">
          <from>Senator Trevor Ó Clochartaigh<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_12">When we discussed this matter members were agreed that the petitioner had raised a significant injustice. In fact, several speakers referred to similar cases in their own area. I propose that we go with recommendations Nos. 2 and 3 from the secretariat, namely, to refer the matter to the Minister for the Environment, Community and Local Government for his consideration, and seek the comments of An Bord Pleanála and the relevant local authority.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PadraigMacLochlainn" eId="spk_3">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">Is the committee agreed that we will refer this petition to the Minister and to An Bord Pleanála and the relevant local authority? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> Petition No. P00053/12 from Ms Catherine Doran is concerned with the revised eligibility criteria for the contributory State pension. Are there recommendations in regard to this petition?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#AengusOSnodaighSF" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Deputy Aengus Ó Snodaigh<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">I recommend that we invite the Minister for Social Protection to come before the committee to explain what steps she has taken to ensure a sufficient time lag between the decision to make a substantial change to the eligibility criteria and the full effect thereof, especially in cases where people have no way to make up the credits or contributions. A discussion on this issue would be a useful exercise.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PadraigMacLochlainn" eId="spk_5">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">Is that agreed? Agreed. We will arrange that meeting in the autumn session.</p>
          <p eId="para_17"> Petition No. P00054/12 from Mr. Tom Kelly relates to the imposition of the 0.6% pension levy on the pensions of former Tara Mines workers. Do members have any recommendations?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PeterMathews" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Deputy Peter Mathews<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">We are dealing with a contrived situation here, with average employee pensions of €10,000. For the purpose of a computation, 17 years multiplied by the average pension of €10,000 amounts to €170,000 when calculating the 0.6% levy. That is a concoction, which is not covered by the legislation. In the interests of equity, therefore, we should write to the Minister asking for the issue to be revisited in order to achieve a fairer outcome.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PadraigMacLochlainn" eId="spk_7">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">Is that recommendation agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_20"> Petition No. P00051/12 from Mr. Michael Callanan sets out concerns in regard to fishing legislation. Do members have a recommendation for this petition?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#NoelHarrington" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Noel Harrington<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">I recommend that the committee write to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine requesting, as set out in the petition, information on the outline of the decommissioning scheme, how those who worked full-time are deemed either eligible or ineligible for the scheme, the number of vessel owners who availed of the scheme and have since taken up employment in the fishing industry and the vagaries of the licensing regime for lobster-pot fishing.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PadraigMacLochlainn" eId="spk_9">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2013-06-26T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_22">Is the Deputy's recommendation agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_23"> That completes our consideration of public petitions. I thank members for their co-operation. Our next meeting will involve a discussion with representatives of the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission regarding both its annual report and its special report to the Minister for Justice and Equality on the failure of the Garda to co-operate with the commission's investigation into the implementation and operation of informant handling procedures.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5"> The joint committee adjourned at 5.05 p.m. until 4 p.m. on Wednesday, 3 July 2013.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
