<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-11-08" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-11-08" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-11-08/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-01-31" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2017-11-08">Dé Céadaoin, 08 Samhain 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2017-11-08">Wednesday, 08 November 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#MartinHeydon">Martin Heydon</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#DiarmuidWilson">Diarmuid Wilson.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Denise Mitchell.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">I láthair / In attendance: Senator Paddy Burke.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2017-11-08T13:30:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-11-08T13:40:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_8">As we have a quorum, we will begin our meeting in public session. Apologies have been received from Deputies Eugene Murphy and Dara Murphy and from Senators Colette Kelleher and Denis Landy. The usual proviso pertains regarding the use of mobile phones; I do not need to go through that again. I propose that we go into private session to deal with some housekeeping matters.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i> The committee went into private session at 1.40 p.m. and resumed in public session at 2. 20 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-11-08T14:20:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">The next item is to record the decisions of the committee. The first petition for consideration is P000020/16 on negotiating norms. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, including a copy of the its customer charter, to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition for consideration is P000024/16 on the criteria to qualify for a primary medical certificate. It is proposed to correspond with the Chief Medical Officer with responsibility for assessing applications for the primary medical certificate regarding the rigid eligibility criteria of the scheme. Is it also proposed to invite the Minister for Finance and for Public Expenditure and Reform to come before the committee to discuss this issue as well as to discuss the delay in the initiation of the proposed health (transport support) Bill. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The next petition for consideration is P000024/17, which relates to regulatory action towards insurance claims and premiums. It is proposed to forward a copy of the quarter 3 progress report by the cost of insurance working group to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The next petition for consideration is P000027/17, entitled "End privatisation of Ireland's Water Network". It is proposed to forward a copy of the relevant Bill to the petitioner, advise him of the future publication of the committee report and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_13"> The next petition for consideration is P000029/17, entitled "The legalisation of cannabis for personal use". It is proposed to forward a copy of the responses from the Departments of Justice and Equality and Health and a copy of the report published by the Joint Committee on Health to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed?</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> As there is no further business, we will adjourn until Wednesday, 22 November, when we will meet Ms Tara O'Sullivan regarding her petition "Make the New English Junior Cert Exam Fairer by adding Thirty Extra Minutes".</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_7"> The joint committee adjourned at 2.25 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 22 November 2017.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
