<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-07-11" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/joint_committee_on_climate_action"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-07-11" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/joint_committee_on_climate_action/2018-07-11/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-19" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <analysis source="#source">
        <parliamentary>
          <voting eId="vote_1" href="#sum_8" outcome="#lost" refersTo="#sum_7">
            <count eId="vote_1-count_1" href="#qty_1" refersTo="#ta" value="10"/>
            <count eId="vote_1-count_2" href="#qty_2" refersTo="#nil" value="11"/>
          </voting>
          <voting eId="vote_2" href="#sum_15" outcome="#carried" refersTo="#sum_14">
            <count eId="vote_2-count_1" href="#qty_3" refersTo="#ta" value="11"/>
            <count eId="vote_2-count_2" href="#qty_4" refersTo="#nil" value="9"/>
          </voting>
        </parliamentary>
      </analysis>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCConcept eId="#lost" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#DeclaredLost" showAs="Declared Lost"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="#carried" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#DeclaredCarried" showAs="Declared Carried"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="#staon" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#StaonVote" showAs="Staon Vote"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="#nil" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#NílVote" showAs="Níl Vote"/>
        <TLCConcept eId="#ta" href="/ie/oireachtas/ontology#TáVote" showAs="Tá Vote"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="BrianStanley" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Brian-Stanley.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Brian Stanley"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="CarolNolan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Carol-Nolan.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Carol Nolan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="EamonRyanGP" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Eamon-Ryan.D.2002-06-06" showAs="Eamon Ryan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="GerryHorkan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Gerry-Horkan.S.2016-04-25" showAs="Gerry Horkan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="GraceOSullivan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Grace-O'Sullivan.S.2016-04-25" showAs="Grace O'Sullivan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="HildegardeNaughton" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Hildegarde-Naughton.S.2013-07-19" showAs="Hildegarde Naughton"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="IanMarshall" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Ian-Marshall.S.2018-04-18" showAs="Ian Marshall"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ImeldaMunster" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Imelda-Munster.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Imelda Munster"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JackChambers" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Jack-Chambers.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Jack Chambers"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="JohnLahart" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/John-Lahart.D.2016-10-03" showAs="John Lahart"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MaireDevine" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Máire-Devine.S.2016-04-25" showAs="Máire Devine"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MarcellaCorcoranKennedy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Marcella-Corcoran-Kennedy.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Marcella Corcoran Kennedy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MartinHeydon" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Martin-Heydon.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Martin Heydon"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MaryButler" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Mary-Butler.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Mary Butler"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="MichelleMulherin" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Michelle-Mulherin.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Michelle Mulherin"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PatrickDeering" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Patrick-Deering.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Pat Deering"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="PaulMurphy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Paul-Murphy.D.2014-10-10" showAs="Paul Murphy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ThomasPringle" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Thomas-Pringle.D.2011-03-09" showAs="Thomas Pringle"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="TimDooley" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Timmy-Dooley.S.2002-09-12" showAs="Timmy Dooley"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="TimLombard" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Tim-Lombard.S.2016-04-25" showAs="Tim Lombard"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="TomNeville" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Tom-Neville.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Tom Neville"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COMHCHOISTE UM GNÍOMHÚ AR SON NA HAERÁIDE</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Joint Committee on Climate Action</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-07-11">Dé Céadaoin, 11 Iúil 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-07-11">Wednesday, 11 July 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 04:40 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 04:40 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#MaryButler">Mary Butler</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#MaireDevine">Máire Devine</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#JackChambers">Jack Chambers</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#GerryHorkan">Gerry Horkan,*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#MarcellaCorcoranKennedy">Marcella Corcoran Kennedy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#TimLombard">Tim Lombard</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_9">
                  <person refersTo="#PatrickDeering">Pat Deering</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_10">
                  <person refersTo="#IanMarshall">Ian Marshall</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_11">
                  <person refersTo="#TimDooley">Timmy Dooley</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_12">
                  <person refersTo="#MichelleMulherin">Michelle Mulherin</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_13">
                  <person refersTo="#MartinHeydon">Martin Heydon</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_14">
                  <person refersTo="#GraceOSullivan">Grace O'Sullivan.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_15">
                  <person refersTo="#JohnLahart">John Lahart</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_16">
                  <person refersTo="#ImeldaMunster">Imelda Munster</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_17">
                  <person refersTo="#PaulMurphy">Paul Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_18">
                  <person refersTo="#TomNeville">Tom Neville</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_19">
                  <person refersTo="#CarolNolan">Carol Nolan</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_20">
                  <person refersTo="#ThomasPringle">Thomas Pringle</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_21">
                  <person refersTo="#EamonRyanGP">Eamon Ryan</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_22">
                  <person refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Sean Sherlock</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_23">
                  <person refersTo="#BrianStanley">Brian Stanley.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">* In éagmais / In the absence of Senator Paul Daly.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#HildegardeNaughton">Teachta / Deputy Hildegarde Naughton sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T16:40:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T16:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">As a vote has been called in the Seanad we must start and immediately suspend. I propose that we resume at 5.05 p.m. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i> Sitting suspended at 4.45 p.m. and resumed at 5.10 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Election of Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:00:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">I thank the members for attending. As we have a quorum, I wish to call the meeting to order. I remind members to turn off their phones as they interfere with the sound system and with broadcasting. I have received apologies from Senator Paul Daly, for whom Senator Horkan is attending as a substitute. Members are reminded of the long-standing parliamentary practice to the effect that they should not comment on, criticise or make charges against a person outside the Houses or an official, either by name or in such a way as to make him or her identifiable.</p>
          <p eId="para_26"> The first item on the agenda is the election of a Chairman. There are no provisions in Standing Orders that require a nominee to be seconded. I call on members to make nominations.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#GerryHorkan" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Senator Gerry Horkan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_27">I propose Deputy Timmy Dooley.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnLahart" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Deputy John Lahart<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_28">I second that.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EamonRyanGP" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Deputy Eamon Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:00:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_29">I propose Deputy Naughton.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_6">
          <from> Clerk to the Committee<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_30">As there is more than one nomination, I will now put the following question: "That Deputy Timmy Dooley be elected Chairman of the committee."</p>
        </speech>
        <debateSection name="division" eId="dbsect_4">
          <summary eId="sum_7">Question put: </summary>
          <summary title="division" eId="sum_8">The Committee divided: Tá, <quantity refersTo="#ta" normalized="10" eId="qty_1">10</quantity>; Níl, <quantity refersTo="#nil" normalized="11" eId="qty_2">11</quantity>.</summary>
          <debateSection name="ta" eId="dbsect_5">
            <p eId="para_31">Tá</p>
            <p eId="para_32">
              <person refersTo="#MaryButler">Butler, Mary.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_33">
              <person refersTo="#JackChambers">Chambers, Jack.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_34">
              <person refersTo="#MaireDevine">Devine, Máire.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_35">
              <person refersTo="#TimDooley">Dooley, Timmy.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_36">
              <person refersTo="#GerryHorkan">Horkan, Gerry.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_37">
              <person refersTo="#JohnLahart">Lahart, John.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_38">
              <person refersTo="#ImeldaMunster">Munster, Imelda.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_39">
              <person refersTo="#CarolNolan">Nolan, Carol.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_40">
              <person refersTo="#ThomasPringle">Pringle, Thomas.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_41">
              <person refersTo="#BrianStanley">Stanley, Brian.</person>
            </p>
          </debateSection>
          <debateSection name="nil" eId="dbsect_6">
            <p eId="para_42">Níl</p>
            <p eId="para_43">
              <person refersTo="#MarcellaCorcoranKennedy">Corcoran Kennedy, Marcella.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_44">
              <person refersTo="#PatrickDeering">Deering, Pat.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_45">
              <person refersTo="#MartinHeydon">Heydon, Martin.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_46">
              <person refersTo="#TimLombard">Lombard, Tim.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_47">
              <person refersTo="#IanMarshall">Marshall, Ian.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_48">
              <person refersTo="#MichelleMulherin">Mulherin, Michelle.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_49">
              <person refersTo="#HildegardeNaughton">Naughton, Hildegarde.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_50">
              <person refersTo="#TomNeville">Neville, Tom.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_51">
              <person refersTo="#GraceOSullivan">O'Sullivan, Grace.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_52">
              <person refersTo="#EamonRyanGP">Ryan, Eamon.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_53">
              <person refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Sherlock, Sean.</person>
            </p>
          </debateSection>
          <summary title="tellers" eId="sum_9"/>
          <summary title="decision" refersTo="#lost" eId="sum_10">Question declared lost.</summary>
        </debateSection>
        <summary eId="sum_11"> Staon: Deputy Paul Murphy.</summary>
        <summary eId="sum_12"> Question, "That Deputy Hildegarde Naughton be elected Chairman of the committee", put and declared carried.</summary>
        <summary eId="sum_13">
          <i>Deputy Hildegarde Naughton took the Chair. </i>
        </summary>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_7">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_54">I thank the members and my nominator, Deputy Eamon Ryan. It is an honour to be elected Chairman of this important committee. The work we will do over the next few months will have a huge influence on Ireland's future and it could also mean that we will show world leadership in the area of climate action. I take this opportunity to commiserate with my colleauge Deputy Timmy Dooley, who was a member of the Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment with me. We have worked very well together in the past and I know we will do so again. I look forward to working with all members in a very open and collaborative manner. I commend the work of the Citizens' Assembly. It is because of it that we are here today as a special committee to consider its work under the great chairmanship of former Ms Justice Mary Laffoy. We will recommend in our report at the end of our work whatever actions we, as a committee, consider appropriate.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ImeldaMunster" eId="spk_8">
          <from>Deputy Imelda Munster<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_55">I thank the Chairman. I propose, since we have all members in attendance, that we take this opportunity to fill the position of Vice Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_9">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_56">Yes, if members agree. Are there nominations?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ImeldaMunster" eId="spk_10">
          <from>Deputy Imelda Munster<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_57">I propose Deputy Stanley.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#TimDooley" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Deputy Timmy Dooley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_58">I second that.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MarcellaCorcoranKennedy" eId="spk_12">
          <from>Deputy Marcella Corcoran Kennedy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_59">I propose Deputy Sean Sherlock.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MartinHeydon" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Deputy Martin Heydon<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_60">I second that.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_14">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_61">I am required to put the following question: "That Deputy Brian Stanley be elected Vice Chairman of the committee."</p>
        </speech>
        <debateSection name="division" eId="dbsect_7">
          <summary eId="sum_14">Question put: </summary>
          <summary title="division" eId="sum_15">The Committee divided: Tá, <quantity refersTo="#ta" normalized="11" eId="qty_3">11</quantity>; Níl, <quantity refersTo="#nil" normalized="9" eId="qty_4">9</quantity>.</summary>
          <debateSection name="ta" eId="dbsect_8">
            <p eId="para_62">Tá</p>
            <p eId="para_63">
              <person refersTo="#MaryButler">Butler, Mary.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_64">
              <person refersTo="#JackChambers">Chambers, Jack.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_65">
              <person refersTo="#MaireDevine">Devine, Máire.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_66">
              <person refersTo="#TimDooley">Dooley, Timmy.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_67">
              <person refersTo="#GerryHorkan">Horkan, Gerry.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_68">
              <person refersTo="#JohnLahart">Lahart, John.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_69">
              <person refersTo="#ImeldaMunster">Munster, Imelda.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_70">
              <person refersTo="#GraceOSullivan">O'Sullivan, Grace.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_71">
              <person refersTo="#ThomasPringle">Pringle, Thomas.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_72">
              <person refersTo="#EamonRyanGP">Ryan, Eamon.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_73">
              <person refersTo="#BrianStanley">Stanley, Brian.</person>
            </p>
          </debateSection>
          <debateSection name="nil" eId="dbsect_9">
            <p eId="para_74">Níl</p>
            <p eId="para_75">
              <person refersTo="#MarcellaCorcoranKennedy">Corcoran Kennedy, Marcella.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_76">
              <person refersTo="#PatrickDeering">Deering, Pat.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_77">
              <person refersTo="#MartinHeydon">Heydon, Martin.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_78">
              <person refersTo="#TimLombard">Lombard, Tim.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_79">
              <person refersTo="#MichelleMulherin">Mulherin, Michelle.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_80">
              <person refersTo="#HildegardeNaughton">Naughton, Hildegarde.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_81">
              <person refersTo="#TomNeville">Neville, Tom.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_82">
              <person refersTo="#CarolNolan">Nolan, Carol.</person>
            </p>
            <p eId="para_83">
              <person refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Sherlock, Sean.</person>
            </p>
          </debateSection>
          <summary title="tellers" eId="sum_16"/>
          <summary title="decision" refersTo="#carried" eId="sum_17">Question declared carried.</summary>
        </debateSection>
        <summary eId="sum_18"> Staon: Deputy Paul Murphy and Senator Ian Marshall.</summary>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_15">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_84">I congratulate Deputy Stanley and offer my commiserations to Deputy Sherlock.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrianStanley" eId="spk_16">
          <from>Deputy Brian Stanley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:10:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_85">I commiserate with Deputy Sherlock. I know I will work well with him on the committee. I thank the members for supporting me. I will work with all the members.</p>
          <p eId="para_86">We face an important challenge, and I look forward to supporting Deputy Naughton in her role as Chair. The challenge facing the country is significant and we have a great deal of catching up to do on the issue of climate change. This committee is probably the most important one to be formed in the Thirty-second Dáil, given the life and death issues at stake. Nothing is more important. I look forward to working with everyone.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_17">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_87">I thank the Deputy. We might move on to the next-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EamonRyanGP" eId="spk_18">
          <from>Deputy Eamon Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_88">May I speak before we start?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_19">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_89">Yes.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EamonRyanGP" eId="spk_20">
          <from>Deputy Eamon Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_90">Well done to the Chairman and Deputy Stanley. It is important that we mark the work of Stop Climate Chaos, which is a coalition of environmental NGOs. Following the Citizens' Assembly's report, Stop Climate Chaos wrote to the Dáil Business Committee asking that the Dáil follow up on it. The Business Committee referred the matter to the Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment, of which the Chairman and I are members. Deputies Dooley, Stanley, the Chairman and I have worked well together on that committee, so I am confident now.</p>
          <p eId="para_91"> When the Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment was asked to consider this matter by the Business Committee, we realised that we did not have the scope or strength to take on what needed to be done. That is why this committee has been established. We have done some preparatory work at the relevant Oireachtas committee, but we now have a major opportunity to make this Oireachtas work and to follow on from some of the experience of recent committees, particularly the repeal committee, which followed on from a Citizens' Assembly recommendation, in doing a similar scale and importance of work. We should recognise the role of Stop Climate Chaos and the Environmental Pillar in helping to initiate the establishment of this committee.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_21">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_92">I concur.</p>
          <p eId="para_93"> I will move through some housekeeping items, the first of which is the approach to our work programme. In view of the short time available to us before the final report is to be produced, the committee needs to have a focused work programme that is both targeted and realistic. The work should result in meaningful recommendations that can be monitored and achieved over time. The Citizens' Assembly report contains all of the relevant evidence. As with the Joint Committee on the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution, there is little value in trying to duplicate the assembly's work. Therefore, it is proposed that the committee should not actively seek submissions from the public and should seek expert opinion only where the committee agrees to that. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MaryButler" eId="spk_22">
          <from>Deputy Mary Butler<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_94">I congratulate the Chairman. What is the committee's timeframe? By when are we meant to publish a report?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_23">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_95">By 31 January, but I hope to have our work done by Christmas and to tie up loose ends in January. We should focus on having our work done by the end of this year.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MaryButler" eId="spk_24">
          <from>Deputy Mary Butler<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_96">I thank the Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_25">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_97">There will be an interim report by 11 September. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#JohnLahart" eId="spk_26">
          <from>Deputy John Lahart<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_98">The interim report will be published by when?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_27">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_99">That is to be published by 11 September.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PatrickDeering" eId="spk_28">
          <from>Deputy Pat Deering<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_100">That will never-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MaireDevine" eId="spk_29">
          <from>Senator Máire Devine<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_101">How are we going to do that?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MartinHeydon" eId="spk_30">
          <from>Deputy Martin Heydon<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_102">It is a significant volume of work.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_31">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_103">It will be set out in the work programme. That will all be covered in what we are about to discuss, namely, a terms of reference group. We can change the date; I am in members' hands in that regard. Is it agreed that we only seek experts where the committee agrees to do so? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_104"> Regarding the structure of the committee's work programme, a modular approach is proposed. In light of the short timeline and the imminent summer recess, it is proposed that we agree a format at today's meeting for the first two modules of our meetings: setting out the context and background; and the departmental Secretaries General. The proposed modular approach to our meetings will be based on the structure that I am about to outline.</p>
          <p eId="para_105"> I propose that module 1 comprise two meetings. First, we will seek an overview from the chair of the Citizens' Assembly, Ms Justice Mary Laffoy, on its report and ask her to highlight any gap in the report that the assembly may be aware of. Inviting the chair of the assembly to present this overview is a recognition that the key provision of the special committee's orders of reference is to consider the third report and recommendations of the assembly. Inviting the chairperson of the assembly to the Joint Committee on the Eighth Amendment on the Constitution proved especially valuable, as she identified specific areas that the assembly's report on the eighth amendment did not cover. Doing so informed that committee's work programme significantly.</p>
          <p eId="para_106"> Second, I propose that we seek overview statements from the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, the chairman of the Climate Change Advisory Council, Professor John FitzGerald, Professor Alan Barrett of the ESRI, and the Environmental Pillar. The ESRI's statement would be of particular significance, given the emphasis placed on climate change at the national economic dialogue.</p>
          <p eId="para_107"> Turning to module 2-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EamonRyanGP" eId="spk_32">
          <from>Deputy Eamon Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_108">Might I suggest that we also include a representative from the Environmental Pillar as one of the key contributors?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_33">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_109">Yes, the Environmental Pillar will be included. Regarding module 2, I suggest that we-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_34">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_110">The Chair is speaking to the modules now and we are being asked to agree them, but we are not-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_35">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_111">This is just our initial meeting. We will invite the chairperson of the Citizens' Assembly, whose report we are reviewing. It is important that we have Ms Justice Laffoy attend.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_36">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_112">I have no disagreement with that whatsoever. What I am trying to ascertain is whether we are being given a list of names and asked to agree them. I am hopeful that there will be some degree of flexibility regarding who we can invite-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_37">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_113">There will be.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_38">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_114">-----and that the witness list is not being presented to us as a <i>fait accompli</i>.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_39">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_115">Absolutely not. This meeting is just about setting the tone and background. Modules 1 and 2 are the matters we can decide on today.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_40">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_116">I thank the Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_41">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_117">This is about our September meetings, and members' feedback will be needed as to which experts should be invited, as we may need more information on specific matters. This is just about getting the ball rolling in September so that we can have these people ready.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_42">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_118">That is fine.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_43">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_119">In module 2, I suggest that we meet the Secretaries General of the relevant Departments, as per our orders of reference, to determine whether they are on track regarding the various actions assigned to them under the national mitigation plan, namely, the sectoral mitigation measures, and whether they have identified additional sectoral mitigation measures that could inform further implementation of the national mitigation plan and the preparation of Ireland's draft integrated national energy and climate plan, taking into account the recently published national development plan. Secretaries General can also inform us as to how the recommendations of the assembly can inform changes to those plans.</p>
          <p eId="para_120"> It is proposed that, over several meetings, we will engage with the Secretaries General and senior officials of seven Departments to examine their sectoral mitigation plans and adaptation plans and consider how the recommendations of the assembly can inform changes to those plans.</p>
          <p eId="para_121"> It is proposed that the meetings of modules 1 and 2 will be as follows. Members may wish to look at their diaries now. From 4 to 6 December-----</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_44">
          <from>Deputy Sean Sherlock<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_122">September.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_45">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_123">I am sorry. From 4 to 6 September, we would have the chair of the Citizens' Assembly, the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, the Climate Change Advisory Council, the ESRI and the Environmental Pillar. From 11 to 20 September, we would have the Secretaries General of the relevant Departments. If members wish to go into private session to discuss these dates, we can.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#TimDooley" eId="spk_46">
          <from>Deputy Timmy Dooley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_124">To be helpful, I suggest that the list of dates be circulated. We could then have a brief meeting tomorrow. It is just that a great deal of information has been imparted and we need to look at our diaries.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrianStanley" eId="spk_47">
          <from>Deputy Brian Stanley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_125">I will make a suggestion on the dates. Perhaps we could do some housekeeping at the end of the meeting.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_48">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_126">We can revert on the dates.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrianStanley" eId="spk_49">
          <from>Deputy Brian Stanley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_127">We need to decide which Departments' Secretaries General to invite. We do not want all 14 Departments represented. Four are highly relevant. With a timeframe of approximately 16 weeks, the main part of our work will have to be tied up by mid-December. We should invite the four certain Departments, although one or two others may need to be invited as well.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_50">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_128">I will ask members to decide on which Secretaries General.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrianStanley" eId="spk_51">
          <from>Deputy Brian Stanley<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_129">Okay.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMurphy" eId="spk_52">
          <from>Deputy Paul Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_130">What dates did the Chairman mention regarding the second module?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_53">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_131">They are 4 to 6 September and, for the Secretaries General, 11 to 20 September.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMurphy" eId="spk_54">
          <from>Deputy Paul Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_132">Is the Chairman suggesting that we pick a number of meetings within that timeframe?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_55">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_133">Yes. A Wednesday slot at 1.30 p.m. is available. We can go into private session to discuss these dates if members wish.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMurphy" eId="spk_56">
          <from>Deputy Paul Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_134">Will each of the modules be one meeting or a couple?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_57">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_135">Several meetings.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMurphy" eId="spk_58">
          <from>Deputy Paul Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_136">They will be distinct modules over a period of days.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_59">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_137">Yes. Is that okay?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#PaulMurphy" eId="spk_60">
          <from>Deputy Paul Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_138">Yes. I thank the Chairman.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_61">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_139">Deputy Ryan wishes to comment.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EamonRyanGP" eId="spk_62">
          <from>Deputy Eamon Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:20:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_140">A bit of work has been done by our other committee to prepare for this. I do not remember whether it was Deputy Dooley or Deputy Stanley's suggestion, but I agree that we do not have to decide the exact dates now.</p>
          <p eId="para_141">As Deputy Stanley has said, we do not have to agree the exact details and dates here. I understand that the second group from 11-20 September is the first of the Secretaries General to come in to the committee. It would not be the case that we would see all the Secretaries General within that timeframe; we would need a staggered approach so we have time to prepare for each meeting. That time would be for the first of those meetings.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_63">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_142">We would need to give the Secretaries General and Ms Justice Mary Laffoy an indication on dates now. We can do this over today and tomorrow.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MaireDevine" eId="spk_64">
          <from>Senator Máire Devine<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_143">If 11 September is the time for the first interim report, all that we would have done by then is module 1. Is that correct?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_65">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_144">We will be starting module 1. The interim report will be our work plan. We will be working on this over the summer. There will be a reference group also over the summer.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#MaryButler" eId="spk_66">
          <from>Deputy Mary Butler<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_145">Can I make a proposal? I am the Chairman of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation. I believe that for discussion on this level of detail we should go into private session.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#" eId="spk_67">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-07-11T17:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_146">Would the members be agreeable to going into private session for this item? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_19"><i>
					</i>The joint committee went into private session at 5.31 p.m. and adjourned at 5.58 p.m.<i>, sine die.</i></summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
