<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-05-02" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-05-02" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-05-02/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-26" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-05-02">Dé Céadaoin, 02 Bealtaine 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-05-02">Wednesday, 02 May 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Denise Mitchell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#ColetteKelleher">Colette Kelleher.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_8">
                  <person refersTo="#BrendanRyanDublin">Brendan Ryan.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2018-05-02T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-05-02T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">Apologies have been received from Deputy Dara Murphy and Senator Diarmuid Wilson. The usual provisos apply to the use of mobile phones. In accordance with the standard procedures agreed to by the committee, all documentation for the meeting has been circulated to members on the documents database. I propose that we go into private session to deal with a number of matters.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i>The joint committee went into private session at 1.33 p.m. and resumed in public session at 1.35 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2018-05-02T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-05-02T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_10">The first petition for consideration is Petition No. P00039/17. The petitioner believes the closure of the Dáil bar would be in the public interest as Leinster House is a place of work and should lead by example. It is proposed that the Committee on Public Petitions deem the petition to be inadmissible under Standing Order 111C(1)(b) on the grounds that it does not comply with Standing Orders. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P0005/18. The petitioner, Ms Elisabeth Hourihane, believes there is an anomaly in the Mental Health Act 2001 which does not address the issue of addiction. She believes it should be rectified through legislation. It is proposed that the committee forward to the petitioner a copy of the response received from the Department of Health on the matter and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00013/18. The petitioner, Mrs. Collette McDonald, would like to see a reclassification of first-time buyer status to include those who have not owned a home for a number of years. The petitioner cites the cases of those who have lived outside the country for a number of years and migrated home. It is proposed that the committee forward to the petitioner a copy of the response received from the Department of Finance and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_13"> The final petition for consideration is Petition No. P00014/18, which concerns the potential visit to Ireland of the President of the United States of America. It is proposed that the committee deem the petition to be inadmissible under Standing Orders 111B(1) and 111C(1)(a). Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.40 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 16 May 2018.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
