<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-01-24" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-01-24" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-01-24/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-06" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="BrendanRyanDublin" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Brendan-Ryan.S.2007-07-23" showAs="Brendan Ryan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-01-24">Dé Céadaoin, 24 Eanáir 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-01-24">Wednesday, 24 January 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#BrendanRyanDublin">Brendan Ryan.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T13:30:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T13:30:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_7">Apologies have been received from Deputy Dara Murphy and Senator Colette Kelleher.</p>
          <p eId="para_8"> Members are requested to ensure that for the duration of the meeting their mobile phones are turned off or switched to airplane, safe or flight mode, depending on the device used. It is not sufficient for them to leave them in silent mode as they maintain a level of interference with the broadcasting system. </p>
          <p eId="para_9"> I propose that we go into private session to deal with a number of housekeeping matters.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i> The joint committee went into private session at 1.35 p.m and resumed in public session at 2 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T14:00:00+00:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T14:00:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_10">The first petition for consideration is Petition No. P00018/16. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Justice and Equality to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00017/17 . It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment to the petitioner, inform him of the Private Members' Bill, Waste Reduction Bill 2017, and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_12"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00042/17. It is proposed to deem the petition to be inadmissible, as set out in Dáil Standing Order 111C.(1)<i>(f)</i>. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_13"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00034/16. It is proposed to forward a copy of the Official Report on the debate in the Dáil on the motion to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00043/17 from Mr. Joseph O'Shea and entitled, Lack of Appeal Opportunity for Pension Assessment.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#BrendanRyanDublin" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Brendan Ryan<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T14:00:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">May I refer to Petition No. P00034/16? The Chairman proposed that we close the petition, but I think we agreed to keep it open.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-01-24T14:00:00+00:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">I referred to Petition No. P00034/16 instead of Petition No. P00043/17. I thank the Deputy for correcting my mistake. I made an error by calling out the wrong number. I should have dealt with Petition No. P00043/17 before coming to petition No. P00034/16.</p>
          <p eId="para_17"> Petition No. P00034/16 is from Mr. Joseph O'Shea on the lack of an appeal opportunity for a pension assessment. It is proposed that we correspond with the Department of Justice and Equality to ask it for clarification of the reason the decision of the Ombudsman has not been enforced; that we forward a copy of the response from the Pensions Ombudsman in the United Kingdom for the attention of the Minister for Justice and Equality and suggest consideration be given to the powers of the Pensions Ombudsman in the United Kingdom, with a view to implementing the same or similar powers in Ireland and that we forward copies of all of the responses to the petitioner and leave the petition open. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The joint committee adjourned at 2.05 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 7 February 2018.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
