<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-09-27" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2017-09-27" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2017-09-27/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-01-29" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="DeniseMitchell" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Denise-Mitchell.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Denise Mitchell"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ShaneCassells" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Shane-Cassells.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Shane Cassells"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2017-09-27">Dé Céadaoin, 27 Meán Fómhair 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2017-09-27">Wednesday, 27 September 2017</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#JerryButtimer">Jerry Buttimer</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#DeniseMitchell">Denise Mitchell</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_6">
                  <person refersTo="#ColetteKelleher">Colette Kelleher.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_7">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_8">Apologies have been received from Deputy Martin Heydon. The usual rules apply on mobile phones. I will follow my own direction on that and put my phone on airplane mode. I propose that we now go into private session to deal with some housekeeping matters. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_5">
          <i> The joint committee went into private session at 1.35 p.m. and resumed in public session at 2.35 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_9">The next item on the agenda is to record the decisions of the committee. The first petition for consideration is No. P000007/17, from Mrs. Alexandra Koster, relating to the eradication of homework for children in primary school. We have agreed to forward a copy of the petitioner's response to the Minister for Education and Skills to establish whether there is any intention to review the type of homework distributed to children in primary schools and also to seek clarification as to how the Department monitors the engagement by schools with parents and students in establishing a homework policy. We would also request that the petitioner substantiate her suggestion of the following: that there is firm evidence based on extensive research which suggests that homework for young people is of little or no educational benefit and can often be the cause of stress and anxiety from a young age; and the teaching of young children should be play and activity based with lots of outdoor time and opportunities to move around physically. We recommend that we keep the petition open and ask the petitioner to advance further some of the assertions she has made. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition for consideration is No. P000012/17 to devolve full legal responsibility and decision-making for archaeology and heritage to the Heritage Council. The suggestion is that we would forward a copy of the response from the Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht and the Heritage Council of Ireland to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ShaneCassells" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Shane Cassells<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_11">I wish to speak on this particular petition because the petitioner has repeatedly referenced the Hill of Tara, the Tara landscape valley and areas that are of particular concern to me and mean a lot to me. The Hill of Tara is a very emotive and passionate subject to every single Meath person. It is an area I visit every single weekend with my children. The area is considered by Meath people to be a sacred place. The language used in the petition is extremely insulting to the heritage officer in County Meath, Dr. Loreto Guinan, who has done considerable work. During my time on Meath County Council I worked on a number of conservation projects for that area. I wonder if the petitioner visits the Hill of Tara every single weekend and knows what goes on there in terms of conservation and promotion, and the respect local people have for that sacred place and making sure it is in no way desecrated and is, in fact, enhanced.</p>
          <p eId="para_12">There is ongoing conservation work by the Office of Public Works, OPW, at the old cemetery wall which is joined with the Mound of the Hostages. It is painstaking work due to the complexities of the area.</p>
          <p eId="para_13"> Reference is made to the draft landscape conservation area, LCA, and getting people into a room. People were brought into a room eight years ago. I was there when people verbally attacked the late Minister, Shane McEntee, when the LCA was discussed. The representatives of Meath know this subject well. There was more conservation done on the Hill of Tara during the works on the M3 than ever before. It was a road built miles away from the N3. However, if one listened to RTE or read certain newspapers, one would believe it was built through it.</p>
          <p eId="para_14"> Planners, councillors, Deputies and everyone associated with the county development plan have protected that monument to the very hilt. When people talk about being uninterested in getting involved with wider infrastructure versus national heritage, I find that insulting. Public representatives in County Meath are passionate and protective about that landscape. It is an insult to our heritage officer given the important place Tara has in world heritage and in the county plan.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_4">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_15">It is recorded that the committee will close the petition.</p>
          <p eId="para_16"> The next petition for consideration is petition No. P000019/17, from Mr. Johnny Anderson, that the Lough Foyle ferry service should be maintained by the British and Irish Governments. It is proposed to forward a copy of the response from Donegal County Council and Causeway Coast and Glens Borough Council to the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport. The committee will also outline that, due to the uncertainty of the effects of Brexit, the committee recommends the Department assist Donegal County Council in seeking funding for ferry services which have the potential to increase tourism in coastal areas; request that the Minister report any progress on funding back to the committee; correspond with the Northern Ireland Assembly on the funding of this route; correspond with Donegal County Council; and outline that the committee will correspond with the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, as well as with the Northern Ireland Assembly, on funding for ferry services which have the potential to increase tourism in coastal areas. We will forward a copy of the responses received to the petitioner and, due to the uncertainty of Brexit and its impact on the areas mentioned, the petition will remain open. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_5">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_17">I agree with these recommendations. We all know the importance of keeping this service open. I acknowledge that Donegal County Council is anxious this service is sustained and it is providing a substantial subvention towards it. Unfortunately, the Causeway Coast and Glens Borough Council has little or no interest in funding this, bar allowing the use of the slip and the facilities. It is unfair this service is caught in a catch-22. It is not eligible for funding from Fáilte Ireland and is not considered for any infrastructure funding from the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport. We need to find out which Department should be responsible.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_6">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_18">Does the Deputy agree with the committee’s proposals?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_7">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_19">Yes.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_8">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_20">The next petition for consideration is petition No. P000024/17, from Mr. Christian Fuglsang, on regulatory action on insurance claims and premiums. Given the work of the Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach, and the working group on insurance, it is recommended that copies of the report of the working group and the first quarterly progress report are forwarded to the petitioner. It has been agreed, however, in private session to keep the petition open. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_9">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_21">It is important we monitor this to see what progress is made.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_10">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_22">That is agreed then. The next petition for consideration is petition No. P000030/17, from Ms. Arjita Chawla, a request for amending legislation relating to dog control. It is proposed the committee corresponds with the Department responsible and requests that clearer communication on this matter be available in each city council and local authority public office. The committee will also seek clarification of the enforcement powers relating to a court decision under current legislation; correspond with the County and City Management Association and request that it also contact all its members and suggest that clearer communication on this matter be available in each city council and local authority public office; and forward a copy of the response from the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government to the petitioner, informing her of the decision of the committee on the petition. It is also proposed that the committee requests that she provides proof of a decision of the court not being executed. Are the recommendations agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_23"> The last petition for consideration is petition No. P000032/17, from Mr. Frederic Vidal, entitled Catalan Civil Rights Compromised. The petitioner wishes to invite representatives from the Houses of the Oireachtas to Spain in advance of the referendum on Catalan independence as he is of the opinion that the civil rights of citizens are not being respected. We have had to deem the petition inadmissible as per Standing Order 111C(1)(<i>a</i>), “a petition is admissible unless it requests the Dáil to do anything other than the Dáil has power to do”. It is an interesting petition nonetheless. I am sure committee members have their views on the legality or otherwise of the forthcoming referendum. However, we are constrained by Standing Orders and, accordingly, must deem the petition inadmissible. Is that agreed?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_11">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_24">May I can come in on that Chairman?</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_12">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_25">Certainly. I expected you to make a political point on this.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#DeniseMitchell" eId="spk_13">
          <from>Deputy Denise Mitchell<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_26">The actions of the Spanish Government in attempting to block the right of the people of Catalonia to decide their own future is disgraceful. There has been a concerted campaign by the Spanish Government to conflate what is democratic and legal. The Spanish Constitution forbids any region from breaking away to form its own state. As a State which broke away from its largest neighbour, I believe the Irish people would have much sympathy towards the people of Catalonia. While I understand the petition has been ruled out of order, I want to put on the record my belief that if Ireland or any other states are requested by the regional government of Catalonia to observe the referendum, it would be fair then to send observers.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_14">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2017-09-27T14:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_27">As there is no further business, the committee is adjourned.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6"> The committee adjourned at 2.50 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 11 October 2017.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
