<akomaNtoso xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13" xsi:schemaLocation="http://docs.oasis-open.org/legaldocml/ns/akn/3.0/CSD13 ./akomantoso30.xsd">
  <debate name="Official Report">
    <meta>
      <identification source="#debates">
        <FRBRWork>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-10-24" name="#generation"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#author" href="/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/committee_on_public_petitions"/>
          <FRBRcountry value="ie"/>
          <FRBRname value="debate"/>
        </FRBRWork>
        <FRBRExpression>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate/mul@/main"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate/mul@"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2018-10-24" name="#reported"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
          <FRBRlanguage language="eng"/>
        </FRBRExpression>
        <FRBRManifestation>
          <FRBRthis value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate/mul@/main.xml"/>
          <FRBRuri value="/akn/ie/debateRecord/committee_on_public_petitions/2018-10-24/debate/mul@.akn"/>
          <FRBRdate date="2020-02-18" name="#publication"/>
          <FRBRauthor as="#editor" href="#debates"/>
        </FRBRManifestation>
      </identification>
      <references source="#debates">
        <TLCPerson eId="EugeneMurphy" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Eugene-Murphy.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Eugene Murphy"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="GerryHorkan" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Gerry-Horkan.S.2016-04-25" showAs="Gerry Horkan"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="SeanSherlock" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Seán-Sherlock.D.2007-06-14" showAs="Seán Sherlock"/>
        <TLCPerson eId="ShaneCassells" href="/ie/oireachtas/member/id/Shane-Cassells.D.2016-10-03" showAs="Shane Cassells"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/chair" showAs="Chair" eId="Chair"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/vice_chairman" showAs="Vice Chairman" eId="Vice_Chairman"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/author" showAs="author" eId="author"/>
        <TLCRole href="role/editor" showAs="editor" eId="editor"/>
      </references>
    </meta>
    <preface>
      <block name="title_ga">
        <docTitle>DÍOSPÓIREACHTAÍ PARLAIMINTE</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="title_en">
        <docTitle>PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES</docTitle>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_ga">
        <docProponent>TITHE an OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="proponent_en">
        <docProponent>HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTAS</docProponent>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_ga">
        <docCommittee>AN COISTE UM ACHAINÍOCHA ÓN BPOBAL</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="committee_en">
        <docCommittee>Committee on Public Petitions</docCommittee>
      </block>
      <block name="status_ga">
        <docStatus>TUAIRISC OIFIGIÚIL</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="status_en">
        <docStatus>(OFFICIAL REPORT)</docStatus>
      </block>
      <block name="date_ga">
        <docDate date="2018-10-24">Dé Céadaoin, 24 Deireadh Fómhair 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block name="date_en">
        <docDate date="2018-10-24">Wednesday, 24 October 2018</docDate>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_en">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
      <block refersTo="#unrevised" name="version_ga">
        <docStatus/>
      </block>
    </preface>
    <debateBody>
      <debateSection name="prelude" eId="dbsect_1">
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_1">Tháinig an Comhchoiste le chéile ag 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <summary class="Center" eId="sum_2">The Joint Committee met at 01:30 p.m.</summary>
        <rollCall>
          <summary class="Center" eId="sum_3">Comhaltaí a bhí i láthair / Members present:</summary>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_1">Teachtaí Dála / Deputies</p>
              </th>
              <th>
                <p eId="para_2">Seanadóirí / Senators</p>
              </th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_3">
                  <person refersTo="#ShaneCassells">Shane Cassells</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_4">
                  <person refersTo="#GerryHorkan">Gerry Horkan.*</person>
                </p>
              </td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>
                <p eId="para_5">
                  <person refersTo="#EugeneMurphy">Eugene Murphy.</person>
                </p>
              </td>
              <td/>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <summary eId="sum_4">* In éagmais / In the absence of Senator Diarmuid Wilson.</summary>
          <summary eId="sum_5">
            <person as="#Chair" refersTo="#SeanSherlock">Teachta / Deputy Sean Sherlock sa Chathaoir / in the Chair.</person>
          </summary>
        </rollCall>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_2">
        <heading>Business of Joint Committee<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:30:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_1">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:30:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_6">As per the advice given, I am switching my mobile phone to airplane mode. I hope committee members will all do the same.</p>
          <p eId="para_7"> I propose that we go into private session to deal with some matters before resuming in public session. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_6">
          <i> The joint committee went into private session at 1.39 p.m. and resumed in public session at 1.42 p.m.</i>
        </summary>
      </debateSection>
      <debateSection name="debate" eId="dbsect_3">
        <heading>Decisions on Public Petitions Received<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></heading>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_2">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_8">The first petition for consideration is Petition No. P00021/18. The decision is that we forward a copy of the response received from the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_9"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00026/18. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the reply received from the Department of Health to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_10"> The next petition for consideration is Petition No. P00038/18. It is proposed that we write to the petitioner informing them that, as the Houses of the Oireachtas have just begun to consider the matter, the committee has decided to close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
          <p eId="para_11"> The final petition for consideration is Petition No. P00016/18. It is proposed that we forward a copy of the reply received from the Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht to the petitioner and close the petition. Is that agreed? Agreed.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#ShaneCassells" eId="spk_3">
          <from>Deputy Shane Cassells<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_12">On the final petition, with reference to the discussion we had on the previous occasion and the review which the petitioner was seeking to address, significant information was provided on the level of awareness of the issue, which was much higher than perhaps people appreciated, given the statistical information we had been given. In one sense, it showed the value of the review both for the orchestras and RTÉ as the parent body and was quite helpful.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#EugeneMurphy" eId="spk_4">
          <from>Deputy Eugene Murphy<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_13">I agree with Deputy Cassells. It was interesting to find out more about the orchestras and what they were doing. We are supportive of them and will try to keep that support going.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#SeanSherlock" eId="spk_5">
          <from> Chairman<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_14">It was fruitful for the committee to engage with RTÉ on the issue. The orchestras may not have had an outlet within the Oireachtas. It proves the value of the petition received from Ms Joyce, for which I thank her.</p>
          <p eId="para_15"> I thank Senator Horkan for attending.</p>
        </speech>
        <speech by="#GerryHorkan" eId="spk_6">
          <from>Senator Gerry Horkan<recordedTime time="2018-10-24T13:40:00+01:00"/></from>
          <p eId="para_16">The Chairman is most welcome.</p>
        </speech>
        <summary eId="sum_7"> The joint committee adjourned at 1.45 p.m. until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 21 November 2018.</summary>
      </debateSection>
    </debateBody>
  </debate>
</akomaNtoso>
